======================================================================
  Public Contract Code
  State of California
======================================================================

Source: Official California Legislative Information
        https://downloads.leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/
Extracted: April 27, 2026


======================================================================



======================================================================

DIVISION 1. PURPOSE AND PRELIMINARY MATTERS [100. - 102.]

100.

The Legislature finds and declares that placing all public contract law in one code will make that law clearer and easier to find. Further, it is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this code to achieve the following objectives:

(a) To clarify the law with respect to competitive bidding requirements.

(b) To ensure full compliance with competitive bidding statutes as a means of protecting the public from misuse of public funds.

(c) To provide all qualified bidders with a fair opportunity to enter the bidding process, thereby stimulating competition in a manner conducive to sound fiscal practices.

(d) To eliminate favoritism, fraud, and corruption in the awarding of public contracts.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 485, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

101.

California public contract law should be efficient and the product of the best of modern practice and research.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 42, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

102.

To encourage competition for public contracts and to aid public officials in the efficient administration of public contracting, to the maximum extent possible, for similar work performed for similar agencies, California’s public contract law should be uniform.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 42, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



======================================================================

DIVISION 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS [1100. - 22355.]



PART 1. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS [1100. - 9204.]



  CHAPTER 1. Definitions [1100. - 1104.]

1100.

“Public entity,” as used in this part, means the state, county, city, city and county, district, public authority, public agency, municipal corporation, or any other political subdivision or public corporation in the state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 1120, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

1100.7.

This code is the basis of contracts between most public entities in this state and their contractors and subcontractors. With regard to charter cities, this code applies in the absence of an express exemption or a city charter provision or ordinance that conflicts with the relevant provision of this code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2001, Ch. 832, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------

1101.

“Public works contract,” as used in this part, means an agreement for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any public structure, building, road, or other public improvement of any kind.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 1120, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

1102.

“Emergency,” as used in this code, means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

1103.

“Responsible bidder,” as used in this part, means a bidder who has demonstrated the attribute of trustworthiness, as well as quality, fitness, capacity, and experience to satisfactorily perform the public works contract.

The Legislature finds and declares that this section is declaratory of existing law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 972, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

1104.

No local public entity, charter city, or charter county shall require a bidder to assume responsibility for the completeness and accuracy of architectural or engineering plans and specifications on public works projects, except on clearly designated design build projects. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a local public entity, charter city, or charter county from requiring a bidder to review architectural or engineering plans and specifications prior to submission of a bid, and report any errors and omissions noted by the contractor to the
 architect or owner. The review by the contractor shall be confined to the contractor’s capacity as a contractor, and not as a licensed design professional.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 1.6. Electronic Transmissions [1600. - 1601.]

1600.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, counties, a city and county, and state agencies may enter into and make payment on contracts by way of electronic transmission, including, but not limited to, the issuance of solicitation documents, and the receipt of responses thereto.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 876, Sec. 15.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

1601.

(a) Any public entity may adopt methods and procedures to do any of the following:

(1) Receive bids on public works or other contracts over the Internet, but only if no bid can be opened before the bid deadline and all bids can be verified as authentic.

(2) Receive supporting materials submitted pursuant to a public works contract over the Internet. For purposes of this section, “supporting materials” includes, but
 is not limited to, payment requests, shop drawings, schedules, notices of claims, and certified payrolls.

(b) If a public entity allows or requires bids or supporting materials to be submitted over the Internet pursuant to this section, the public entity shall provide an electronic receipt to the contractor showing the date and time the submission was received. The public entity shall provide the electronic receipt to the contractor either by immediate transmission to the contractor or by providing the contractor access to an electronic file online that contains this information and that can be viewed and printed by the contractor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2007, Ch. 427, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2008.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2. Responsive Bidders [2000. - 2010.]

2000.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law requiring a local agency to award contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, a local agency may require that a contract be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder who also does either of the following:

(1) Meets goals and requirements established by the local agency relating to participation in the contract by minority business enterprises and women business enterprises. If the bidder does not meet the goals and requirements established by the local agency for that participation, the
 local agency shall evaluate the good faith effort of the bidder to comply with those goals and requirements as provided in paragraph (2).

(2) Makes a good faith effort, in accordance with the criteria established pursuant to subdivision (b), prior to the time bids are opened, to comply with the goals and requirements established by the local agency relating to participation in the contract by minority or women business enterprises.

(b) (1) The bidder attended any presolicitation or prebid meetings that were scheduled by the local agency to inform all bidders of the minority and women business enterprise program requirements for the project for which the contract will be awarded. A local agency may waive this requirement if it determines that the bidder is informed as to those program requirements.

(2) The bidder identified and selected specific items of the project for which the contract will be awarded to be performed by minority or women business enterprises to provide an opportunity for participation by those enterprises.

(3) The bidder advertised, not less than 10 calendar days before the date the bids are opened, in one or more daily or weekly newspapers, trade association publications, minority or trade oriented publications, trade journals, or other media, specified by the local agency for minority or women business enterprises that are interested in participating in the project. This paragraph applies only if the local agency gave public notice of the project not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date the bids are opened.

(4) The bidder provided written notice of
 the bidder’s interest in bidding on the contract to the number of minority or women business enterprises required to be notified by the project specifications not less than 10 calendar days prior to the opening of bids. To the extent possible, the local agency shall make available to the bidder not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date the bids are opened a list or a source of lists of enterprises which are certified by the local agency as minority or women business enterprises. If the local agency does not provide that list or source of lists to the bidder, the bidder may utilize the list of certified minority or women business enterprises prepared by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Section 14030.5 of the Government Code for this purpose.

(5) The bidder followed up initial solicitations of interest by contacting the enterprises to determine with certainty whether the enterprises were
 interested in performing specific items of the project.

(6) The bidder provided interested minority and women business enterprises with information about the plans, specifications, and requirements for the selected subcontracting or material supply work.

(7) The bidder requested assistance from minority and women community organizations; minority and women contractor groups; local, state, or federal minority and women business assistance offices; or other organizations that provide assistance in the recruitment and placement of minority or women business enterprises, if any are available.

(8) The bidder negotiated in good faith with the minority or women business enterprises, and did not unjustifiably reject as unsatisfactory bids prepared by any minority or women business enterprises, as determined by the local
 agency.

(9) Where applicable, the bidder advised and made efforts to assist interested minority and women business enterprises in obtaining bonds, lines of credit, or insurance required by the local agency or contractor.

(10) The bidder’s efforts to obtain minority and women business enterprise participation could reasonably be expected by the local agency to produce a level of participation sufficient to meet the goals and requirements of the local agency.

(c) The performance by a bidder of all of the criteria specified in subdivision (b) shall create a rebuttable presumption, affecting the burden of producing evidence, that a bidder has made a good faith effort to comply with the goals and requirements relating to participation by minority and women business enterprises established pursuant to subdivision (a).

(d) “Local agency,” as used in this section, means a county or city, whether general law or chartered, city and county, school district, or other district. “District,” as used in this section, means an agency of the state, formed pursuant to general law or special act, for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries.

(e) “Minority or women business enterprise,” as used in this section, means a business enterprise that meets both of the following criteria:

(1) A business that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more minority persons or women or, in the case of any business whose stock is publicly held, at least 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more minority persons or women.

(2) A business whose
 management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more minority persons or women.

(f) “Minority person,” for purposes of this section, means Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans (including American Indians, Inuit, Aleuts, and Native Hawaiians), Asian-Pacific Americans (including persons whose origins are from Japan, China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Korea, Samoa, Guam, the United States Trust Territories of the Pacific, Northern Marianas, Laos, Cambodia, and Taiwan), or any other group of natural persons identified as minorities in the project specifications by the local agency.

(g) This section does not apply to any of the following:

(1) A contract, funded in whole or in part by the federal government, to the extent of any conflict between the requirements imposed by this section and any requirements imposed by the federal government relating to participation in a contract by a minority or women business enterprise as a condition of receipt of the federal funds.

(2) The San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District, the Los Angeles County Transportation Commission, or any other local agency that has authority to facilitate the participation of minority or women business enterprises substantially similar to the authority granted to the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District pursuant to Section 20229 of this code or
 the Los Angeles County Transportation Commission pursuant to Section 130239 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 104, Sec. 4.   (AB 2287)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

2001.

(a) Any local agency, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 2000, that requires that contracts be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder meeting, or making a good faith effort to meet, participation goals for minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprises shall provide in the general conditions under which bids will be received, that any person making a bid or offer to perform a contract shall, in his or her bid or offer, set forth the following information:

(1) The name and the location of the place of business of each subcontractor certified as a minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprise who will perform work or labor or render service to the prime contractor in connection with the performance of the contract and who will be used by the prime contractor to fulfill minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise participation goals.

(2) The portion of work that will be done by each subcontractor under paragraph (1). The prime contractor shall list only one subcontractor for each portion of work as is defined by the prime contractor in his or her bid or offer.

(b) The Subletting and Subcontracting Fair Practices Act (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) shall apply to the information required by subdivision (a) relating to subcontractors certified as minority, women, or disabled veteran
 business enterprises.

(c) For purposes of this section, “subcontractor” and “prime contractor” shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Section 4113.

(d) As used in this section, “contract” does not include a contract negotiated pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1032, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

2002.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law requiring a local agency to award contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, any local agency may do any of the following in facilitating contract awards to small businesses:

(1) Provide for a small business preference in construction, the procurement of goods, or the delivery of services where responsibility and quality are equal.

The local agency shall set the percent and financial value of a preference. The maximum percentage of a preference shall be 7 percent of the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications and the maximum financial value shall be one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) for any bid.

(2) Establish a subcontracting participation goal for small businesses on contracts and grant a preference, pursuant to paragraph (1), to those bidders who meet the goal.

(3) (A) Require bidders to make good faith efforts to meet a subcontracting participation goal for small business contracts. Bidders that fail to meet the goal established by the local agency, shall demonstrate that they made good faith efforts to meet the goal.

(B) A prime contractor may, subject to the approval of the local agency, substitute a subcontractor with another small business as applicable. A local agency shall approve the substitution of a subcontractor only in the instance where the substitution meets the requirements of paragraph (6) of subdivision (d) and the local agency’s adopted policy.

(4) Set
 additional guidelines for local preference purposes.

(b) (1) The local agency shall define the eligibility for a preference authorized pursuant to this section.

(2) In defining eligibility for a “small business,” a local agency shall, at a minimum, include businesses meeting the requirements of a small business enterprise certified pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 14835) of Chapter 6.5 of Part 5.5 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(c) Every local agency that offers a preference, pursuant to this section, shall, prior to offering a preference, adopt a procurement policy that includes, at a minimum, all of the following:

(1) A definition of an eligible entity for each preference category being utilized by
 the local agency.

(2) The percentage and maximum financial value of a single preference.

(3) A requirement that a preference only be awarded to a small business that performs a commercially useful function, as defined in subdivision (e).

(4) A policy regarding oversight and potential fraudulent behavior on the part of a contractor, subcontractor, or individual for the purpose of qualifying as a small business and being awarded a preference. 

(5) A policy for determining whether a contractor has made a good faith effort, pursuant to paragraph (3) of subdivision (a).

(6) A policy on how a prime contractor may substitute a subcontractor, pursuant to subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3) of
 subdivision (a). This policy shall, at a minimum, include all of the following:

(A) The identification of the condition or conditions for which a substitution of subcontractors is authorized. 

(B) A requirement that construction subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this section shall be afforded all the protections of the Subletting and Subcontracting Fair Practices Act (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100)).

(C) A requirement that a subcontractor that served to qualify the bid package for a preference shall be replaced only with a subcontractor meeting the eligibility requirements of subdivision (b).

(D) A requirement that the condition qualifying the substitution be verified with the subcontractor.

(d) Every entity used to qualify a bid for a preference pursuant to this section shall perform a commercially useful function. A “commercially useful function” means:

(1) A contractor is deemed to perform a commercially useful function if the contractor, including a subcontractor, does all of the following:

(A) Is responsible for the execution of a distinct element of the work of the contract.

(B) Carries out its obligation by actually performing, managing, or supervising the work involved.

(C) Performs work that is normal for its business services and functions.

(D) Is responsible, with respect to products, inventories,
 materials, and supplies required for the contract, for negotiating price, determining quality and quantity, ordering, installing, if applicable, and making payment.

(E) Is not further subcontracting a portion of the work that is greater than that expected to be subcontracted by normal industry practices.

(2) A contractor or subcontractor shall not be considered to perform a commercially useful function if the contractor’s or subcontractor’s role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction, contract, or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the appearance of a small business.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 654, Sec. 1.   (AB 2762)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

2010.

A person that submits a bid or proposal to, or otherwise proposes to enter into or renew a contract with, a state agency with respect to any contract in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more shall certify, under penalty of perjury, at the time the bid or proposal is submitted or the contract is renewed, all of the following:

(a) That they are in compliance with the Unruh Civil Rights Act (Section 51 of the Civil Code).

(b) That they are in compliance with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 12960) of Part 2.8 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government
 Code).

(c) (1) That any policy that they have against any sovereign nation or peoples recognized by the government of the United States, including, but not limited to, the nation and people of Israel, is not used to discriminate in violation of the Unruh Civil Rights Act (Section 51 of the Civil Code) or the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 12960) of Part 2.8 of Division 3 of Title 2 of
 the Government Code).

(2) Any policy adopted by a person or actions taken thereunder that are reasonably necessary to comply with federal or state sanctions or laws affecting sovereign nations or their nationals shall not be construed as unlawful discrimination in violation of the Unruh Civil Rights Act (Section 51 of the Civil Code) or the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 12960) of Part 2.8 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2016, Ch. 581, Sec. 2.   (AB 2844)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.5. Certification of Minority and Women Business Enterprises [2050. - 2057.]

2050.

It is the intent of the Legislature that any awarding department shall accept for purposes of public contract work any state or local agency certification for minority, women, and disadvantaged business enterprises if that certification meets the certification criteria contained in Part 23 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. It is also the intent of the Legislature that definitions for minority and women business enterprises, as specified in subdivisions (e) and (f) of Section 10115.1, shall constitute a clarification of, rather than a change in,
 existing law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1329, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

2051.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Awarding department” means any state agency, department, governmental entity, including the California State University, or officer or entity empowered by law to enter into contracts on behalf of the State of California.

(b) “Department” means the Department of Transportation.

(c) “Minority,” for purposes of this section, means a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States who is an ethnic person of color and who is: Black (a person having origins in any of the Black racial groups of Africa); Hispanic (a person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or other
 Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin regardless of race); Native American (an American Indian, Inuk, Aleut, or Native Hawaiian); Pacific-Asian (a person whose origins are from Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, the Philippines, Samoa, Guam, or the United States Trust Territories of the Pacific, including the Northern Marianas); Asian-Indian (a person whose origins are from India, Pakistan, or Bangladesh); or any other group of natural persons identified as minorities in the respective project specifications of an awarding department or participating local agency.

(d) “Minority business enterprise” means a business concern that meets all of the following criteria:

(1) The business is at least 51 percent owned by one or more minorities or, in the case of any business whose stock is publicly held, at least 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more
 minorities.

(2) A business whose management and daily operations are controlled by one or more minorities who own the business.

(3) A business concern with its home office located in the United States which is not a branch or subsidiary of a foreign corporation, firm, or other business.

(e) “Women business enterprise” means a business concern that meets all of the following criteria:

(1) The business is at least 51 percent owned by one or more women or, in the case of any business whose stock is publicly held, at least 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more women.

(2) A business whose management and daily operations are controlled by one or more women who own the business.

(3) A business concern with its home office located in the United States which is not a branch or subsidiary of a foreign corporation, firm, or other business.

(f) A “disadvantaged business enterprise” means a business concern that is all of the following:

(1) A “disadvantaged business” as that term is used in Part 23 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(2) An individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or joint venture.

(3) Organized for profit, with a place of business located in the United States and which makes a significant contribution to the United States economy through payment of taxes or use of American products, materials, or labor.

(g) “Participating state or local agency” means any state or local agency that elects to participate in the certification process pursuant to this chapter. For purposes of this subdivision, the following definitions apply:

(1) “District” means an agency of the state, formed pursuant to general law or special act, for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries.

(2) “Local agency” means a county or city, whether general law or chartered, city and county, school district, or other district.

(3) “State agency” means any department, division, board, bureau, commission, or agency of the executive branch of government.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 67, Sec. 160.   (AB 1170)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

2052.

(a) All awarding departments and local agencies shall accept a certification by any participating state agency whose certification criteria complies with Part 23 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. All awarding departments shall, and local agencies may, accept a certification by any participating local agency whose certification criteria complies with Part 23. Those participating state or local agency certifications shall be deemed sufficient to qualify minority, women, and disadvantaged business enterprises for purposes of
 contracts that are fully or partially funded by the federal government, contracts fully or partially funded by all state agencies, and contracts fully or partially funded by all local agencies, as defined in Part 3 (commencing with Section 20100).

(b) All awarding departments and local agencies shall accept the certification of a minority, women, or disadvantaged business enterprise made by a participating state agency as valid status of that enterprise, with respect to the identities of the persons certified as having ownership and control of the business enterprise, when awarding contracts to minority, women, and disadvantaged business enterprises. All awarding departments shall, and local agencies may, accept this certification when made by a participating local agency. No awarding department shall require a business enterprise, which has complied with the certification criteria of a participating state or local agency, to comply with any
 other certification process for certifying minority, women, and disadvantaged business enterprises. However, a participating local agency may impose additional conditions for certification of a business enterprise concerning its status as a minority, women, or disadvantaged business enterprise relating to ethnicity, business size, and business location for participation in local programs.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 210, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

2053.

(a) A participating state or local agency shall certify a business enterprise as a minority or women business enterprise if that business enterprise meets the definition of a minority or women business enterprise specified in subdivisions (d) and (e) of Section 2051 in accordance with the eligibility standards set forth in Section 23.53 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(b) A participating state or local agency shall certify a business enterprise as a
 disadvantaged business enterprise if that business enterprise meets the definition of a disadvantaged business enterprise specified in subdivision (f) of Section 2051, in accordance with the “Guidance for Making Determinations of Social and Economic Disadvantage” set forth in Appendix C to Subpart D of Part 23 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(c) The participating state or local agency may include a site visit as part of its certification process. However, if a participating state or local agency certifies an applicant without conducting a site visit, any other participating state or local agency may conduct a site visit to verify ownership and control of the minority, women, or disadvantaged business enterprise. For purposes of conducting a site visit, certification documentation retained by the participating state or local agency shall be provided, upon request, to any other participating state or local agency. The applicant
 shall be subject to only one site visit per year, unless ownership and control changes have occurred in the business within the 12-month period following a site visit. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a participating state or local agency from conducting a site visit for purposes of preparing a response to an appeal from a notice of intent to decertify pursuant to Section 2055.

(d) A participating state or local agency shall complete the certification process, including verification of information submitted by the applicant and the performance of a site visit, if applicable, within 60 working days after receipt of a completed application, and shall submit the appropriate information to the Department of Transportation for insertion into the computerized data bank created pursuant to Section 2056.

(e) The grant of certification of a business enterprise by a participating
 state or local agency shall be valid for two years. A business enterprise that has been denied certification by a participating state or local agency may reapply for certification after six months have elapsed since the date of the denial of certification.

(f) A participating state or local agency shall provide adequate security methods to prevent contamination and unauthorized access to the information gathered during the verification process.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1993, Ch. 433, Sec. 12.   Effective September 24, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

2054.

(a) The department shall develop and make available to all awarding departments and local agencies a directory of all state and local agencies participating in the standardized certification process pursuant to this chapter. An awarding department may count, for purposes of meeting statewide participation goals, those business enterprises that have been certified by a participating state or local agency.

(b) The certification shall be under penalty of perjury. The certification
 application form shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

(1) Name of firm and address.

(2) Name of person to contact.

(3) Business telephone.

(4) Type of ownership.

(5) Controlling interest (ethnicity and citizenship).

(6) Documentation or evidence of minority ethnicity.

(7) Name of owners, general partners, and officers of firm and their percent of ownership in the firm. If a corporation, total outstanding stock and a percentage breakdown of ownership.

(8) Management
 control of firm in the following areas:

(A) Financial decisions.

(B) Estimating.

(C) Marketing and sales.

(D) Hiring and dismissal of management.

(E) Purchasing of major equipment and supplies.

(9) Documentation of identity of owner or management official who is, or has been, within the last three years, an owner, manager, or employee of another firm that has an ownership interest or a present business relationship with the firm. Present business relationships include shared space, employees, equipment, or financing. Explanation of these relationships.

(10) Bonding capabilities.

(11) Questions regarding whether the firm has been denied certification, or any of the individuals listed in paragraph (7) have been involved with a firm that has been denied certification, as a minority, women, or disadvantaged business enterprise by a participating state or local agency.

(12) Type of business (for example, service, goods, construction).

(13) Provision for the attachment of a copy of an active business and contractor’s license, or any other pertinent license or permit.

(14) Location area of state to be considered for work.

(15) Other documentation required to verify ownership and control of a certification applicant in accordance
 with Sections 23.51 and 23.53 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and with Publication No. FHWA-CR-90-003, dated April 1990, entitled “Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Program Administration Participant’s Manual” published by the Federal Highway Administration in the United States Department of Transportation.

(16) Affidavit that all information is true and correct, including statement under penalty of perjury.

(c) A participating state or local agency granting or denying the certification shall compile and maintain documentation supporting each of the criteria set forth in subdivision (b) for a minimum of two years. The documentation shall include, but not be limited to, one copy of the issued certification with the name of the person or persons responsible for reviewing and authorizing the certification and the date on which each review and authorization
 occurred.

(d) The minority, women, or disadvantaged business enterprises seeking certification shall designate on the application form the information that they consider proprietary. Any information so designated shall be confidential. However, if notice is given by a participating state or local agency of its intention to decertify a business enterprise certified pursuant to this chapter, the participating state or local agency that granted the original certification shall provide access to all of its certification documentation to a participating state or local agency seeking to decertify the business enterprise, if the participating state or local agency seeking to decertify the business enterprise agrees to honor the confidentiality of the information designated as proprietary.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1329, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

2055.

A participating state or local agency may challenge the certification of a business enterprise made by another participating state or local agency as follows:

(a) The participating state or local agency seeking to challenge the certification determination made by another participating state or local agency shall give written notice to the certifying agency of its intention to challenge the certification determination. The certifying agency shall reexamine its certification determination and submit
 written notice to the challenging agency and the business enterprise of its findings after reexamination within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice.

(b) If the challenging agency is not satisfied with the finding of the certifying agency after reexamination, the challenging agency shall submit written notice to the business enterprise, with a copy to the certifying agency, of its intention to decertify the business enterprise.

(c) A business enterprise that has received notice of decertification by an agency may appeal that decertification decision in accordance with the procedures of the agency that made the decertification decision.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1329, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

2056.

(a) The department shall establish and administer a computerized databank containing a list of certified minority, women, and disadvantaged business enterprises. On or before July 1, 1993, the data shall be made accessible to all awarding departments, local agencies, and the public for use in contracting for goods, construction, and services with those business enterprises.

(b) The databank shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

(1) Name, address, and telephone number.

(2) Ethnicity.

(3) Gender.

(4) Name of the participating state or local agency that conducted a site visit, and date of site visit, if applicable.

(5) Type of ownership.

(6) Product or service categories.

(7) Geographical area.

(8) Name of the participating state or local agency that performed the certification.

(9) Any additional local requirements met by the enterprise, if applicable.

(10) A record of actions by a participating state or local agency resulting in certification denial or decertification.

(c) Information from the databank shall be made available to local public agencies and the public by the date specified in subdivision (a).

(d) The database developed to implement this section shall enable the department to monitor changes to this information and to issue any reports as may be required.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 168, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

2057.

This chapter shall not apply to any professional services contract subject to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 16850) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1329, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.7. Iran Contracting Act of 2010 [2200. - 2208.]

2200.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Iran Contracting Act of 2010.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2201.

The Legislature hereby finds and declares all of the following:

(a) In imposing United States sanctions on Iran, Congress and the President have determined that the illicit nuclear activities of the Government of Iran, combined with its development of unconventional weapons and ballistic missiles, and its support of international terrorism, represent a serious threat to the security of the United States, Israel, and other
 United States allies in Europe, the Middle East, and around the world. 

(b) On September 9, 2009, it was reported that American intelligence agencies have concluded that Iran has already created enough nuclear fuel to develop a nuclear weapon, and United States Ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency Glyn Davies declared that Iran had achieved “possible breakout capacity.” 

(c) On September 21, 2009, Iran sent a letter to the International Atomic Energy Agency acknowledging that it is considering a previously undeclared “new pilot fuel enrichment plan.” 

(d) On Sept. 25, 2009, President Barack H. Obama, joined by Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain and President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, stated that the secret plant “represents a direct challenge to the basic foundation of the nonproliferation
 regime” and “deepens a growing concern that Iran is refusing to live up to those international responsibilities, including specifically revealing all nuclear-related activities. As the international community knows, this is not the first time that Iran has concealed information about its nuclear program.” 

(e) The International Atomic Energy Agency has repeatedly called attention to Iran’s unlawful nuclear activities, and, as a result, the United Nations Security Council has adopted a range of sanctions designed to encourage the Government of Iran to cease those activities and comply with its obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (commonly known as the “Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty”). 

(f) On July 1, 2010, President Barack Obama signed into law H.R. 2194, the “Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010” (Public
 Law 111-195), which expressly authorizes states and local governments to prevent investment in, including prohibiting entry into or renewing contracts with, companies operating in Iran’s energy sector with investments that have the result of directly or indirectly supporting the efforts of the Government of Iran to achieve nuclear weapons capability.

(g) On October 7, 2008, then-Senator Obama stated, “Iran right now imports gasoline, even though it’s an oil producer, because its oil infrastructure has broken down. If we can prevent them from importing the gasoline that they need and the refined petroleum products, that starts changing their cost-benefit analysis. That starts putting the squeeze on them.” 

(h) The serious and urgent nature of the threat from Iran demands that states, local governments, educational institutions, and private institutions work together with the
 federal government and American allies to do everything possible diplomatically, politically, and economically to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapons capability. 

(i) There are moral and reputational reasons for this state and local governments to not engage in business with foreign companies that have business activities benefiting foreign states, such as Iran, that commit egregious violations of human rights, proliferate nuclear weapons capabilities, and support terrorism.

(j) It is the responsibility of the state to decide how, where, and by whom its financial resources should be invested. It also is the prerogative of the state to not invest in, or do business with, companies whose investments with Iran place those companies at risk from the impact of economic sanctions imposed upon the Government of Iran for sponsoring terrorism, committing egregious violations of
 human rights, and engaging in illicit nuclear weapons development. 

(k) The human rights situation in Iran has steadily deteriorated in 2009, as punctuated by transparently fraudulent elections and the brutal repression and murder, arbitrary arrests, and show trials of peaceful dissidents. 

(l) During the postelection protests in June 2009, the Iranian government imposed widespread and unjustifiable restrictions on telecommunications services, denying the citizens of Iran their rights and liberties to free speech. 

(m) On October 14, 2007, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger stated his intention to support “efforts to further prevent terrorism” when signing Assembly Bill 221, which prohibits the state’s pension funds from investing in companies with active business in Iran. 

(n) This state currently honors contracts with foreign companies that may be at financial risk due to business ties with foreign states, such as Iran, that are involved in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, commit human rights violations, and support terrorism. 

(o) The concerns of the State of California regarding Iran are strictly the result of the actions of the Government of Iran.

(p) The people of the State of California declare all of the following:

(1) We have feelings of friendship for the people of Iran.

(2) We regret that developments in recent decades have created impediments to that friendship.

(3) We
 hold the people of Iran, their culture, and their ancient and rich history in the highest esteem. 

(q) In order to effectively address the need for the governments of this state to respond to the policies of Iran in a uniform fashion, prohibiting contracts with persons engaged in investment activities in the energy sector of Iran must be accomplished on a statewide basis, and, therefore, the subject is a matter of statewide concern rather than a municipal affair. 

(r) It is the intent of the Legislature to implement the authority granted under Section 202 of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-195).

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2202.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Awarding body” means a department, board, agency, authority, or officer, agent, or other authorized representative of the public entity awarding a contract for goods or services.

(b) “Energy sector” of Iran means activities to develop petroleum or natural gas resources or nuclear power in Iran.

(c) “Financial institution” means the term as used in Section 14 of the Iran Sanctions Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-172; 50 U.S.C. 1701 note).

(d) “Iran” includes the Government of Iran and any agency or instrumentality of Iran.

(e) “Person” means any of the following:

(1) A natural person, corporation, company, limited liability company, business association, partnership, society, trust, or any other nongovernmental entity, organization, or group.

(2) Any governmental entity or instrumentality of a government, including a multilateral development institution, as defined in Section 1701(c)(3) of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 262r(c)(3)).

(3) Any successor, subunit, parent entity, or subsidiary of, or any entity under common ownership or control with, any entity described in paragraph (1) or (2).

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2202.5.

For purposes of this chapter, a person engages in investment activities in Iran if any of the following is true:

(a) The person provides goods or services of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) or more in the energy sector of Iran, including a person that provides oil or liquefied natural gas tankers, or products used to construct or maintain pipelines used to transport oil or liquefied natural gas, for the energy sector
 of Iran.

(b) The person is a financial institution that extends twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) or more in credit to another person, for 45 days or more, if that person will use the credit to provide goods or services in the energy sector in Iran and is identified on a list created pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2203 as a person engaging in investment activities in Iran as described in subdivision (a).

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2203.

(a) (1) A person that, at the time of bid or proposal for a new contract or renewal of an existing contract, is identified on a list created pursuant to subdivision (b) as a person engaging in investment activities in Iran as described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.5, is ineligible to, and shall not, bid on, submit a proposal for, or enter into or renew, a contract with a public entity for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more.

(2) A person that, at the time of bid or proposal for a new contract or renewal of an existing contract, engages in investment activities in Iran as described in subdivision (b) of Section 2202.5, is ineligible to, and shall not, bid on, submit a
 proposal for, or enter into or renew, a contract with a public entity for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more.

(b) (1) By June 1, 2011, the Department of General Services shall, using credible information available to the public, develop, or contract to develop, a list of persons it determines engage in investment activities in Iran as described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.5.

(2) The Department of General Services shall update the list every 180 days.

(3) Before finalizing an initial list pursuant to paragraph (1) or an updated list pursuant to paragraph (2), the Department of General Services shall do all of the following before a person is included on the list:

(A) Provide 90 days’ written notice
 of its intent to include the person on the list. The notice shall inform the person that inclusion on the list would make the person ineligible to bid on, submit a proposal for, or enter into or renew, a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a public entity. The notice shall specify that the person, if it ceases its engagement in investment activities in Iran as described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.5, may become eligible for a future contract, or contract renewal, for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a public entity upon removal from the list.

(B) The Department of General Services shall provide a person with an opportunity to comment in writing to the Department of General Services that it is not engaged in investment activities in Iran. If the person demonstrates to the Department of General Services that the person is not engaged in investment activities in
 Iran as described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.5, the person shall not be included on the list, and shall be eligible to enter into or renew a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a public entity, unless the person is otherwise ineligible to bid on a contract as described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 2205.

(4) The Department of General Services shall make every effort to avoid erroneously including a person on the list.

(5) The Department of General Services may assess a fee upon persons that use this list to comply with the provisions of this act, in order to pay for the necessary, actual costs of creating and maintaining this list. The Department of General Services shall provide the list free of charge to any public entity and to the Legislature, upon request.

(6) A person that has a contract with CalPERS or CalSTRS, or both, shall not be deemed a person that engages in investment activities in Iran on the basis of those investments with CalPERS or CalSTRS.

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a public entity may permit a person engaged in investment activities in Iran, on a case-by-case basis, to be eligible for, or to bid on, submit a proposal for, or enter into or renew, a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a public entity if either of the following are true:

(1) All of the following occur:

(A) The investment activities in Iran were made before July 1, 2010.

(B) The investment activities in Iran have not been expanded or renewed after July 1,
 2010.

(C) The awarding body determines that it is in the best interest of the state or local public entity to contract with the person. For purposes of state contracts for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more, “awarding body” means the Department of General Services. For purposes of local contracts for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more, “awarding body” means the representative of the local public entity awarding the contract, as described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.

(D) The person has adopted, publicized, and is implementing a formal plan to cease the investment activities in Iran and to refrain from engaging in any new investments in Iran.

(2) One of the following occurs:

(A) For a contract
 for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a local public entity, the local public entity makes a public finding that, absent such an exemption, the local public entity would be unable to obtain the goods or services for which the contract is offered.

(B) For a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a state agency, other than the office of a state constitutional officer, the Governor makes a public finding that absent such an exemption, the state agency would be unable to obtain the goods or services for which the contract is offered.

(C) For a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with an office of a state constitutional officer, if the state constitutional officer makes a public finding that, absent such an exemption, his or her office would be unable to obtain the goods or
 services for which the contract is offered.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a public entity shall permit a financial institution described in subdivision (b) of Section 2202.5 to be eligible for, or to bid on, submit a proposal for, or enter into or renew, a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more with a public entity if the person using the credit to provide goods or services in the energy sector of Iran is a person permitted to submit a bid or proposal to the public entity pursuant to subdivision (c).

(e) The prohibition described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) applies on and after June 1, 2011. The prohibition described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) applies on and after July 1, 2011.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 296, Sec. 246.   (AB 1023)   Effective January 1, 2012.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2204.

(a) A public entity shall require a person that submits a bid or proposal to, or otherwise proposes to enter into or renew a contract with, a public entity with respect to a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more to certify, at the time the bid is submitted or the contract is renewed, that the person is not identified on a list created pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2203 as a person engaging in investment activities in Iran
 described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.5, or as a person described in subdivision (b) of Section 2202.5, as applicable. A state agency shall submit the certification information to the Department of General Services.

(b) A public entity shall not require a person that submits a bid or proposal to, or otherwise proposes to enter into a contract with, the public entity with respect to a contract for goods or services of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more to certify that the person is not identified on a list created pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2203 as a person engaging in investment activities in Iran described in subdivision (a) of Section 2202.5, or as a person described in subdivision (b) of Section 2202.5, as applicable, if the person has been permitted to submit a bid or proposal to the public entity pursuant to subdivision (c) or (d) of Section 2203.

(c) (1) Subject to paragraph (2), the certification requirement described in subdivision (a) applies on and after June 1, 2011.

(2) A person that is a financial institution shall not be required to certify as provided in subdivision (a) until July 1, 2011. For any subsequent list created pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2203, a person that is a financial institution shall not be required to certify with respect to that subsequent list until 30 days after that list becomes available, but shall certify with respect to the immediately prior list for those 30 days.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2205.

(a) If the local public entity, or the Department of General Services in the case of state contracts, determines, using credible information available to the public and after providing 90 days written notice and an opportunity to comment in writing for the person to demonstrate that it is not engaged in investment activities in Iran, that the person has submitted a false certification under Section 2204, and the person fails to demonstrate to the local public entity
 or the Department of General Services that the person has ceased its engagement in the investment activities in Iran within 90 days after the determination of a false certification, the following shall apply:

(1) Pursuant to an action under subdivision (b), a civil penalty in an amount that is equal to the greater of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) or twice the amount of the contract for which the false certification was made. Only one civil penalty may be imposed with respect to one or more certifications made to any public entity that are false as a result of a particular investment.

(2) Termination of an existing contract with the awarding body at the option of the awarding body or the Department of General Services.

(3) Ineligibility to bid on a contract for a period of three years from the date of
 the determination that the person submitted the false certification.

(b) The local public entity, or the Department of General Services in the case of state contracts, shall report to the Attorney General the name of the person that the local public entity, or the Department of General Services in the case of state contracts, determines has submitted a false certification under Section 2204, together with its information as to the false certification, and the Attorney General shall determine whether to bring a civil action against the person to collect the penalty described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a). The awarding body of a local public entity may also report to the city attorney, county counsel, or district attorney the name of the person that the awarding body determines has submitted a false certification under Section 2204, together with its information as to the false certification, and the city attorney, county counsel, or
 district attorney may determine whether to bring a civil action against the person to collect the penalty described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a). If it is determined in that action that the person submitted a false certification, the person shall pay all reasonable costs and fees incurred in a civil action, including costs incurred by the awarding body for investigations that led to the finding of the false certification and all reasonable costs and fees incurred by the Attorney General, city attorney, county counsel, or district attorney. Only one civil action against the person to collect the penalty described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) may be brought for a false certification on a contract.

(c) A civil action to collect the penalties described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) must commence within three years from the date the certification is made.

(d) An
 unsuccessful bidder, or any other person other than the awarding body, shall have no right to protest the award of a contract or contract renewal on the basis of a false certification.

(e) This act does not create, nor authorize, a private right of action or enforcement of the penalties provided for in this act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2206.

This act shall occupy the field with regard to all public contracts for goods or services with a person engaged in investment activities in Iran and shall preempt any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation of any local public entity involving public contracts for goods or services with a person engaged in investment activities in Iran.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2207.

The Legislature shall submit to the Attorney General of the United States a written notice describing this chapter within 30 days after the effective date of this act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

2208.

(a) If any one or more provisions, sections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is found to be invalid, illegal, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, the same is hereby declared to be severable and the balance of this act shall remain effective and functional notwithstanding such invalidity, illegality, unenforceability, or unconstitutionality.

(b) The Legislature hereby declares that it would have passed this act, and each provision, section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more provisions, sections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words are declared invalid, illegal, unenforceable, or unconstitutional.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Conditionally inoperative as prescribed by Stats. 2010, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.8. Project Labor Agreements [2500. - 2503.]

2500.

(a) A public entity may use, enter into, or require contractors to enter into, a project labor agreement for a construction project only if the agreement includes all of the following taxpayer protection provisions:

(1) The agreement prohibits discrimination based on race, national origin, religion, sex, sexual orientation, political affiliation, or membership in a labor organization in hiring and dispatching workers for the project.

(2) The agreement permits all qualified contractors and subcontractors to bid for and be awarded work on the project without regard to whether they are otherwise parties to collective bargaining
 agreements.

(3) The agreement contains an agreed-upon protocol concerning drug testing for workers who will be employed on the project.

(4) The agreement contains guarantees against work stoppages, strikes, lockouts, and similar disruptions of the project.

(5) The agreement provides that disputes arising from the agreement shall be resolved by a neutral arbitrator.

(b) For purposes of this chapter, both of the following definitions apply:

(1) “Project labor agreement” means a prehire collective bargaining agreement that establishes terms and conditions of employment for a specific construction project or projects and is an agreement described in Section 158(f) of Title 29 of the United
 States Code.

(2) “Public entity” means a public entity as defined in Section 1100.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 431, Sec. 2.   (SB 922)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

2500.5.

(a) A state agency may use, enter into, or require contractors to enter into, a project labor agreement pursuant to this chapter that applies to a project or set of projects with aggregate construction costs in excess of thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) only if the agreement also includes provisions to address community benefits. Community benefits may include partnerships with high road construction careers programs, as defined in Section 14005 of the Unemployment Insurance Code, local hire goals, coordination with programs that assist veterans in transitioning to civilian employment, job fairs for construction apprenticeship or preapprenticeship programs, or other methods agreed upon by the parties to promote employment and training opportunities for veterans and individuals who reside in
 economically disadvantaged areas.

(b) This section shall apply to project labor agreements entered into on or after January 1, 2026.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 61, Sec. 2.   (SB 150)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

2501.

The members of the governing board of a local public entity may choose by majority vote whether to use, enter into, or require contractors to enter into a project labor agreement that includes all the taxpayer protection provisions of Section 2500 for a specific project or projects awarded by that entity and whether to allocate funding to a specific project covered by such an agreement. A charter provision, initiative, or ordinance shall not prevent the governing board of a local public entity, other than a charter city, from exercising this authority on a project-specific basis.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 431, Sec. 2.   (SB 922)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

2502.

If a charter provision, initiative, or ordinance of a charter city prohibits the governing board’s consideration of a project labor agreement that includes all the taxpayer protection provisions of Section 2500 for a project to be awarded by the city, or prohibits the governing board from considering whether to allocate funds to a city-funded project covered by such an agreement, then state funding or financial assistance shall not be used to support that project. This section shall not be applicable until January 1, 2015, for charter cities in which a charter provision, initiative, or ordinance in effect prior to November 1, 2011, would disqualify a project from receiving state funding or financial assistance.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 431, Sec. 2.   (SB 922)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

2503.

If a charter provision, initiative, or ordinance of a charter city prohibits, limits, or constrains in any way the governing board’s authority or discretion to adopt, require, or utilize a project labor agreement that includes all the taxpayer protection provisions of Section 2500 for some or all of the construction projects to be awarded by the city, then state funding or financial assistance shall not be used to support any
 construction projects awarded by the city. This section shall not be applicable until January 1, 2015, for charter cities in which a charter provision, initiative, or ordinance in effect prior to November 1, 2011, would disqualify a construction project from receiving state funding or financial assistance.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 11, Sec. 1.   (SB 829)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.9. Skilled and Trained Workforce Requirements [2600. - 2604.]

2600.

(a) This chapter applies when a public entity is required by statute or regulation to obtain an enforceable commitment that a bidder, contractor, or other entity will use a skilled and trained workforce to complete a contract or project.

(b) A public entity may require a bidder, contractor, or other entity to use a skilled and trained workforce to complete a contract or project regardless of whether the public entity is required to do so by a statute or regulation.

(c) When the use of a skilled and trained workforce to complete a contract or project is required pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b), the public entity shall include in
 all bid documents and construction contracts a notice that the project is subject to the skilled and trained workforce requirement.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 347, Sec. 1.   (AB 2311)   Effective January 1, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

2600.5.

The failure of a public entity to provide a notice pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 2600 shall not excuse either of the following:

(a) The public entity from the requirement to obtain an enforceable commitment that a bidder, contractor, or other entity will use a skilled and trained workforce to complete a contract or project.

(b) A bidder, contractor, or other entity from the obligation to use a skilled or trained workforce if such a requirement is imposed by a statute or regulation.

(History: Added by Stats. 2020, Ch. 347, Sec. 2.   (AB 2311)   Effective January 1, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

2601.

For purposes of this chapter:

(a) “Apprenticeable occupation” means an occupation for which the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards of the Department of Industrial Relations had approved an apprenticeship program pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code before January 1, 2014.

(b) “Chief” means the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards of the Department of Industrial Relations.

(c) “Graduate of an apprenticeship program” means either of the following:

(1) An individual that has been issued a certificate of completion under the authority of the California
 Apprenticeship Council for completing an apprenticeship program approved by the chief pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code.

(2) An individual that has completed an apprenticeship program located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(d) “Skilled and trained workforce” means a workforce that meets all of the following conditions:

(1) All the workers performing work in an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades are either skilled journeypersons or apprentices registered in an apprenticeship program approved by the chief.

(2) (A) For work performed on or after January 1, 2017, at least 30 percent of the
 skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation. This requirement shall not apply to work performed in the occupation of teamster.

(B) For work performed on or after January 1, 2018, at least 40 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation, except that the requirements of subparagraph (A) shall
 continue to apply to work performed in the following occupations: acoustical installer, bricklayer, carpenter, cement mason, drywall installer or lather, marble mason, finisher, or setter, modular furniture or systems installer, operating engineer, pile driver, plasterer, roofer or waterproofer, stone mason, surveyor, teamster, terrazzo worker or finisher, and tile layer, setter, or finisher.

(C) For work performed on or after January 1, 2019, at least 50 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable
 occupation, except that the requirements of subparagraph (A) shall continue to apply to work performed in the following occupations: acoustical installer, bricklayer, carpenter, cement mason, drywall installer or lather, marble mason, finisher, or setter, modular furniture or systems installer, operating engineer, pile driver, plasterer, roofer or waterproofer, stone mason, surveyor, teamster, terrazzo worker or finisher, and tile layer, setter, or finisher.

(D) For work performed on or after January 1, 2020, at least 60 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable
 occupation, except that the requirements of subparagraph (A) shall continue to apply to work performed in the following occupations: acoustical installer, bricklayer, carpenter, cement mason, drywall installer or lather, marble mason, finisher, or setter, modular furniture or systems installer, operating engineer, pile driver, plasterer, roofer or waterproofer, stone mason, surveyor, teamster, terrazzo worker or finisher, and tile layer, setter, or finisher.

(3) For an apprenticeable occupation in which no apprenticeship program had been approved by the chief before January 1, 1995, up to one-half of the graduation percentage requirements of paragraph (2) may be satisfied by skilled journeypersons who commenced working in the apprenticeable occupation before the chief’s approval of an apprenticeship program for that occupation in the county in which the project is located.

(4) The apprenticeship graduation percentage requirements of paragraph (2) are satisfied if, in a particular calendar month, either of the following is true:

(A) At least the required percentage of the skilled journeypersons employed by the contractor or subcontractor to perform work on the contract or project meet the graduation percentage requirement.

(B) For the hours of work performed by skilled journeypersons employed by the contractor or subcontractor on the contract or project, the percentage of hours performed by skilled journeypersons who met the graduation requirement is at least equal to the required graduation percentage.

(5) The contractor or subcontractor need not meet the apprenticeship graduation requirements of paragraph (2) if, during the
 calendar month, the contractor or subcontractor employs skilled journeypersons to perform fewer than 10 hours of work on the contract or project.

(6) A subcontractor need not meet the apprenticeship graduation requirements of paragraph (2) if both of the following requirements are met:

(A) The subcontractor was not a listed subcontractor under Section 4104 or a substitute for a listed subcontractor.

(B) The subcontract does not exceed one-half of 1 percent of the price of the prime contract.

(e) “Skilled journeyperson” means a worker who either:

(1) Graduated from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was approved by the chief or located outside California and
 approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(2) Has at least as many hours of on-the-job experience in the applicable occupation as would be required to graduate from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that is approved by the chief.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 882, Sec. 1.   (AB 3018)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

2602.

(a) When a contractor, bidder, or other entity is required to provide an enforceable commitment that a skilled and trained workforce will be used to complete a contract or project, the commitment shall be made in an enforceable agreement with the public entity or other awarding body that provides both of the following:

(1) The contractor, bidder, or other entity, and its contractors and subcontractors at every tier, will comply with this chapter.

(2) The contractor, bidder, or other entity will provide to the public entity or other awarding body, on a monthly basis while the project or contract is being performed, a report
 demonstrating compliance with this chapter. The required monthly report demonstrating compliance with this chapter shall include the full name of, and identify the apprenticeship program name, location, and graduation date of, each worker relied upon to satisfy the apprenticeship graduation percentage requirements of paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 2601.

(b) If the contractor, bidder, or other entity fails to provide the monthly report required by this section, or provides a report that is incomplete, the public agency or other awarding body shall withhold further payments until a complete report is provided. If a monthly report
 is incomplete due to the failure of a subcontractor to timely submit the required information to the contractor, bidder, or other entity, the public agency or awarding body shall only withhold an amount equal to 150 percent of the value of the monthly billing for the relevant subcontractor. If a public agency or other awarding body withholds amounts pursuant to this subdivision, the contractor, bidder, or other entity shall be entitled to withhold the same amount from the subcontractor until the subcontractor provides the contractor, bidder, or other entity a complete report, and the public agency or awarding body subsequently pays the contractor, bidder, or other entity the withheld payments. If the contractor, bidder, or other entity substitutes a subcontractor pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) for failure to provide a complete report, and the contractor, bidder, or other entity
 replaces the subcontractor with one that provides an enforceable commitment that a skilled and trained workforce will be used to complete the contract or project, the public agency or awarding body shall immediately resume making payments to the contractor, bidder, or other entity, including all previously withheld payments.

(c) If a monthly report does not demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the public agency or other awarding body shall do all of the following:

(1) Withhold further payments until the contractor, bidder, or other entity provides a plan to achieve substantial compliance with this chapter, with respect to the relevant apprenticeable occupation, prior to completion of the contract or project. All of the following shall apply to the withholding of payments
 under this paragraph:

(A) The public agency or awarding body shall withhold an amount equal to 150 percent of the value of the monthly billing for the entity that failed to comply with this chapter, or 150 percent of the value of the monthly billing for the subcontractor that failed to comply with this chapter. If a public agency or other awarding body withholds amounts pursuant to this paragraph, the contractor,
 bidder, or other entity shall be entitled to withhold the same amount from the subcontractor that did not demonstrate compliance with this chapter.

(B) If the contractor, bidder, or other entity substitutes a subcontractor pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) for failure to demonstrate compliance, and the contractor, bidder, or other entity replaces the subcontractor with one that provides an enforceable commitment that a skilled and trained workforce will be used to complete the contract or project, the public agency or awarding body shall immediately resume making payments to the contractor, bidder, or other entity, including all previously withheld payments.

(C) If a contractor, bidder, or other entity submits to the public agency or
 awarding body a plan to achieve substantial compliance with this chapter, the public agency or awarding body shall immediately resume making payments to the contractor, bidder, or other entity, including all previously withheld payments unless, within a reasonable time, the public agency or awarding body rejects the plan as insufficient and explains the reasons for the rejection.

(2) Forward a copy of the monthly report to the Labor Commissioner for issuance of a civil wage and penalty assessment in accordance with Section 2603.

(3) Forward to the Labor Commissioner a copy of the plan, if any, submitted by the contractor, bidder, or other entity to achieve substantial compliance with this chapter and the response to that plan, if any, by the public agency or awarding body.

(d) A monthly report provided to the public agency or other awarding body shall be a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) and shall be open to public inspection.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 882, Sec. 1.   (SB 1162)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

2603.

(a) If the Labor Commissioner or his or her designee determines after an investigation that a contractor or subcontractor failed to use a skilled and trained workforce in accordance with this chapter, the contractor or subcontractor responsible for the violation shall forfeit, as a civil penalty to the state, not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) per month of work performed in violation of this chapter. A contractor or subcontractor that commits a second or subsequent violation within a three-year period shall forfeit as a civil penalty to the state the sum of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) per month of work performed in violation of this chapter.

(b) For the purposes of this section:

(1) “Any interest” shall have the same meaning as in subdivision (h) of Section 1777.1 of the Labor Code.

(2) “Contractor or subcontractor” shall have the same meaning as in subdivision (g) of Section 1777.1 of the Labor Code.

(3) “Entity” shall have the same meaning as in subdivision (i) of Section 1777.1 of the Labor Code.

(c) The amount of any monetary penalty may be reduced or waived by the Labor Commissioner if the amount of the penalty would be disproportionate to the severity of the violation. The Labor Commissioner shall consider, in setting the amount of a monetary penalty, all of the following
 circumstances:

(1) Whether the violation was intentional.

(2) Whether the contractor or subcontractor has committed other violations of this chapter or of the Labor Code.

(3) Whether, upon notice of the violation, the contractor or subcontractor took steps to voluntarily remedy the violation.

(4) The extent or severity of the violation.

(5) Whether a contractor or subcontractor submitted and followed a plan to achieve substantial compliance with this chapter.

(d) The Labor Commissioner or his or her designee shall issue a civil wage and penalty
 assessment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1741 of the Labor Code, upon determination of penalties assessed under subdivision (a). Review of a civil wage and penalty assessment issued under this subdivision may be requested in accordance with the provisions of Section 1742 of the Labor Code. The regulations of the Director of Industrial Relations, which govern proceedings for review of civil wage and penalty assessments and the withholding of contract payments under Article 1 (commencing with Section 1720) and Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code, shall apply.

(e) The determination of the Labor Commissioner as to the amount of the penalty imposed under subdivision (a) shall be reviewable by the Director of Industrial Relations only for an abuse of discretion.

(f) If a subcontractor is found to have violated this chapter, the prime contractor of the project is not liable for any penalties under subdivision (a) unless the prime contractor had knowledge of the subcontractor’s failure to comply with this chapter or unless the prime contractor fails to comply with any of the following requirements:

(1) For contracts entered into on or after January 1, 2019, the contract executed between the contractor and the subcontractor for the performance of work on the project shall include a copy of this chapter.

(2) The contractor shall periodically monitor the subcontractor’s use of a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) Upon becoming aware of a failure of the subcontractor to use a skilled and trained workforce, the contractor shall take corrective action, including, but not limited to, retaining 150 percent of the amount due to the subcontractor for work performed on the project until the failure is corrected.

(4) Prior to making the final payment to the subcontractor for work performed on the project, the contractor shall obtain a declaration signed under penalty of perjury from the subcontractor that the subcontractor has met the requirements of this chapter.

(g) The
 Labor Commissioner shall notify the prime contractor within 15 days of the receipt by the Labor Commissioner of a complaint that a subcontractor violated this chapter.

(h) Whenever a contractor or subcontractor is found by the Labor Commissioner to be in violation of this chapter with intent to defraud, the contractor or subcontractor or a firm, corporation, partnership, or association in which the contractor or subcontractor has any interest is ineligible for a period of not less than one year or more than three years to do either of the following:

(1) Bid on or be awarded a contract for a public works project.

(2) Perform work as a subcontractor on a public works project.

(i) Whenever a contractor or subcontractor is found by the Labor Commissioner to have committed two or more separate willful violations of this chapter within a three-year period, the contractor or subcontractor or a firm, corporation, partnership, or association in which the contractor or subcontractor has any interest is ineligible for a period of up to three years to do either of the following:

(1) Bid on or be awarded a contract for a public works project.

(2) Perform work as a subcontractor on a public works project.

(j) The debarment procedures adopted by the Labor Commissioner pursuant to Section 1777.1 of the Labor Code shall apply to any finding made under subdivisions (h) or (i) of this section.

(k) The Labor Commissioner shall publish on the commissioner’s Internet Web site a list of contractors who are ineligible to bid on or be awarded a public works contract, or to perform work as a subcontractor on a public works project pursuant to this section. The list shall contain the name of the contractor, the Contractors’ State License Board license number of the contractor, and the effective period of debarment of the contractor. Contractors shall be added to the list upon issuance of a debarment order and the commissioner shall also notify the Contractors’ State License Board when the list is updated. At least annually, the commissioner shall notify awarding bodies of the availability of the list of debarred contractors.

(l) (1) If a public entity or
 awarding body that is required to obtain an enforceable commitment that a skilled and trained workforce will be used to complete a contract or project receives a monthly report which does not demonstrate compliance with the skilled and trained workforce requirements of subdivision (c) of Section 10506.6, Section 10506.8, Section 10506.9, or subdivision (c) of Section 20928.2 of this code, Article 9 (commencing with Section 388) of Chapter 2.3 of Part 1 of Division 1 of the Public Utilities Code, or subparagraph (B) of paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of Section 65913.4 or subparagraph (B) of paragraph (4) of subdivision (f) of Section 66201 of the Government Code, the public entity or awarding body shall forward a copy of the monthly report to the Labor Commissioner for issuance of a civil wage and penalty assessment in accordance with this section.

(2) The penalty and debarment procedures of this section shall apply to violations of subdivision (c) of Section 10506.6, Section 10506.8, Section 10506.9, or subdivision (c) of Section 20928.2 of this code, Article 9 (commencing with Section 388) of Chapter 2.3 of Part 1 of Division 1 of the Public Utilities Code, or subparagraph (B) of paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of Section 65913.4 or subparagraph (B) of paragraph (4) of subdivision (f) of Section 66201 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 882, Sec. 3.   (AB 3018)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

2604.

On or before July 1, 2025, the Division of Apprenticeship Standards shall create and maintain a public online database to verify that a worker graduated from a California apprenticeship program. The database shall be searchable by using the first name, last name, and graduation date of the worker.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 882, Sec. 2.   (SB 1162)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3. Formation [3000. - 3505.]



  ARTICLE 1. Roofing Projects [3000. - 3010.]

3000.

For purposes of this article, the following terms have the following meanings:

(a) “Architect” means an architect who has a current license issued by the state.

(b) “District” means a school district with an average daily attendance greater than 2,500 or a community college district.

(c) “Engineer” means an engineer who has a current license issued by the state.

(d) “Public facility” means a public school or community college.

(e) “Roofing consultant” means a consultant who is registered by RCI (formerly Roof Consultants Institute).

(f) “Roof project” means a project for the replacement or repair of a roof of a public facility, except that “roof project” does not include a project for the repair of 25 percent or less of the roof or a repair project that has a total cost of twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000) or less.

(g) “Substitute” or “substitution” means a material, product, thing, or service proposed by a bidder to be an adequate substitute material, product, thing, or service that is equal to an item designated
 in specifications, pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 3400 and subdivision (a) of Section 10129.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 438, Sec. 1.   (AB 635)   Effective September 29, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

3002.

(a) For purposes of subdivision (b) of Section 3400 and subdivision (a) of Section 10129, for any roof project, a material, product, thing, or service shall be considered equal if it meets all of the following requirements:

(1) The item is at least equal in quality, durability, design, and appearance but not necessarily of an identical color.

(2) The item will perform the intended function at least equally well.

(3) The item conforms substantially, even with deviations, to the detailed requirements contained in the specifications.

(b) A substitute may be unequal if the resulting roof system would be substantially different than other equal or better systems in terms of performance and durability, but not merely different by virtue of the inclusion of proprietary products or a proprietary warranty.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 438, Sec. 1.   (AB 635)   Effective September 29, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

3004.

Specifications for any roof project shall be designed to promote competition.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 438, Sec. 1.   (AB 635)   Effective September 29, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

3006.

(a) (1) An architect, engineer, or roofing consultant who provides professional services related to a roof project shall disclose any financial relationships by completing and signing the certification set forth in subdivision (b) prior to the time professional services are engaged. A materials manufacturer, contractor, or vendor involved in a bid or proposal for a roof project shall disclose any financial relationships by completing and
 signing the certification set forth in subdivision (b) when the award is made. The architect, engineer, roofing consultant, materials manufacturer, contractor, or vendor shall provide the certification to the district.

(2) An architect, engineer, roofing consultant, materials manufacturer, contractor, or vendor shall not disclose a financial relationship in which that person or entity is a stockholder of a corporation the stock of which is listed for sale to the general public on a national securities exchange and registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, if the person or entity holds less than 10 percent of the outstanding stock entitled to vote at the annual meeting of the corporation.

(3) An architect, contractor, engineer, materials manufacturer, roofing consultant, or vendor who knowingly provides false information or fails to disclose a financial
 relationship pursuant to this section shall be liable to the district for any costs to the district that are reasonably attributable to excess or unnecessary costs, when compared to competing bids, incurred by the district as a result of the undisclosed financial relationship.

(b) I, Name, Name of Employer, certify that I have not offered, given, or agreed to give, received, accepted, or agreed to accept, any gift, contribution, or any financial incentive whatsoever to or from any person in connection with the roof project contract. As used in this certification, “person” means any natural person, business, partnership, corporation, union, committee, club, or other organization, entity, or group of individuals. Furthermore, I,
 Name, Name of Employer, certify that I do not have, and throughout the duration of the contract, I will not have, any financial relationship in connection with the performance of this contract with any architect, engineer, roofing consultant, materials manufacturer, distributor, or vendor that is not disclosed below.

I, Name, Name of Employer, have the following financial relationships with an architect, engineer, roofing consultant, materials manufacturer, distributor, or vendor, or other person in connection with the following roof project contract:Name and Address of Building, Contract Date and Number

I certify that to the best of my knowledge, the contents of this disclosure are true, or are believed to be true.

SignatureDate

Print Name

 Print Name of Employer

(c) Any person who knowingly provides false information or fails to disclose a financial relationship in the disclosure
 set forth in subdivision (b) shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount up to one thousand dollars ($1,000), in addition to any other available remedies. An action for a civil penalty under this provision may be brought by any public prosecutor in the name of the people of the State of California.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 438, Sec. 1.   (AB 635)   Effective September 29, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

3008.

(a) To report bid rigging involving local government agencies and employees, including, but not limited to, county, city, and school district employees and officials, an interested person may contact the Antitrust Law Section of the Office of the Attorney General, 300 S. Spring St., Ste. 1702, Los Angeles, CA 90013, (800) 952-5225, or fill out the online complaint form on the Internet Web site of the Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Complaint Against a
 Business/Company) at ag.ca.gov/contact/complaint_form.php?cmplt=CL.

(b) To file a complaint regarding improper bidding involving state funding, an interested person may contact the Bureau of State Audits Whistleblower Hotline for any state agency or institution, at 800-952-5665, or by mail at 555 Capitol Mall, Suite 300, Sacramento, CA 95814.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 438, Sec. 1.   (AB 635)   Effective September 29, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

3010.

This article shall not apply to a school district operating in accordance with Section 20113 or a community college district operating in accordance with Section 20654.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 438, Sec. 1.   (AB 635)   Effective September 29, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Bidders [3300. - 3300.]

3300.

(a) Any public entity, as defined in Section 1100, the University of California, and the California State University shall specify the classification of the contractor’s license which a contractor shall possess at the time a contract is awarded. The specification shall be included in any plans prepared for a public project and in any notice inviting bids required pursuant to this code. 

This requirement shall apply only with respect to contractors who contract directly with the public entity.

(b) A contractor who is not awarded a public contract because of the failure of an entity, as defined in subdivision (a), to comply with that subdivision shall not receive damages for the loss of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 1073, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Preference for Materials [3400. - 3410.]

3400.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that it is the intent of this section to encourage contractors and manufacturers to develop and implement new and ingenious materials, products, and services that function as well, in all essential respects, as materials, products, and services that are required by a contract, but at a lower cost to taxpayers.

(b) No agency of the state, nor any political subdivision, municipal corporation, or district, nor any public officer or person charged with the letting of contracts for the construction, alteration, or repair of public works, shall draft or cause to be drafted specifications for bids, in connection with the construction, alteration, or repair of public works, (1) in a manner that limits the bidding, directly or indirectly, to any one specific concern, or (2) calling for a designated material, product, thing, or service by specific brand or trade name unless the specification is followed by the words “or equal” so that bidders may furnish any equal material, product, thing, or service. In applying this section, the specifying agency shall, if aware of an equal product manufactured in this state, name that product in the specification. Specifications shall provide a period of time prior to or after, or prior to and after, the award of the contract for
 submission of data substantiating a request for a substitution of “an equal” item. If no time period is specified, data may be submitted any time within 35 days after the award of the contract.

(c) Subdivision (b) is not applicable if the awarding authority, or its designee, makes a finding that is described in the invitation for bids or request for proposals that a particular material, product, thing, or service is designated by specific brand or trade name for any of the following purposes:

(1) In order that a field test or experiment may be made to determine the product’s suitability for future use.

(2) In order to match other products in use on a particular public improvement either completed or in the course of completion.

(3) In order to obtain a
 necessary item that is only available from one source.

(4) (A) In order to respond to an emergency declared by a local agency, but only if the declaration is approved by a four-fifths vote of the governing board of the local agency issuing the invitation for bid or request for proposals.

(B) In order to respond to an emergency declared by the state, a state agency, or political subdivision of the state, but only if the facts setting forth the reasons for the finding of the emergency are contained in the public records of the authority issuing the invitation for bid or request for proposals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 132, Sec. 1.   (AB 1086)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

3410.

Any public entity, as defined in Section 1100, including any school district or community college district, when purchasing food, shall give preference to United States-grown produce and United States-processed foods when there is a choice and it is economically feasible to do so. For purposes of this section, the determination of “economically feasible” shall be made by the purchasing public entity, considering the total cost, quantity, and quality of the food and the budget and policies of the entity.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 158, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 5. Buy Clean California Act [3500. - 3505.]

3500.

This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the Buy Clean California Act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 816, Sec. 3.   (AB 262)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

3501.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Awarding authority” means any of the following:

(1) A state agency for a contract for a public works project that is subject to the State Contract Act (Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 10100) of Part 2).

(2) The Regents of the University of California for a contract for a public works project that is subject to Chapter 2.1 (commencing with Section 10500) of Part 2.

(3) The Trustees of the California State University for a contract for a public works project
 that is subject to the California State University Contract Law (Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 10700) of Part 2).

(b) “Department” means the Department of General Services.

(c) “Eligible materials” means any of the following:

(1) Carbon steel rebar.

(2) Flat glass.

(3) Insulation. 

(4) Structural steel.

(d) “Eligible project” means a project that the awarding authority determines will require eligible materials.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 325, Sec. 1.   (SB 1207)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

3502.

(a) By January 1, 2022, the department, in consultation with the State Air Resources Board, shall establish, and publish in the State Contracting Manual or a department management memorandum, or make available on the department’s internet website, a maximum acceptable global warming potential for each category of eligible materials in accordance with both of the following requirements:

(1) The department shall set the maximum acceptable global warming potential at the industry average of facility-specific global warming potential emissions for that material with a phase-in period of not more than two years. The department shall determine the industry average by consulting recognized databases of environmental product declarations.
 If the department determines that the facility-specific environmental product declarations available do not adequately represent the industry as a whole, it may use industrywide environmental product declarations based on domestic production data in its calculation of the industry average. When determining the industry averages pursuant to this paragraph, the department should include all stages of manufacturing required by the relevant product category rule. However, when setting the initial industry average, the department may exclude emissions that occur during fabrication stages, and make reasonable judgments aligned with the product category rule.

(2) The department shall express the maximum acceptable global warming potential as a number that states the maximum acceptable facility-specific global warming potential for each category of eligible materials. The department may set different maximums
 for different products within each category and, when more than one set of product category rules exists for a category or set of products, may set a different maximum for each set of product category rules. The global warming potential shall be provided in a manner that is consistent with criteria in an Environmental Product Declaration.

(b) The department, by January 1, 2022, shall submit a report to the Legislature that describes the method that the department used to develop the maximum global warming potential for each category of eligible materials pursuant to subdivision (a). The report required by this subdivision shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(c) By January 1, 2025, and every three years thereafter, the department shall review the maximum acceptable global warming potential for each category of eligible materials established pursuant to subdivision (a), and may adjust that number downward for any eligible material to reflect industry improvements if the department, based on the process described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a), determines that the industry average has changed, but the department shall not adjust that number upward for any eligible material. At that time, the department shall update the State Contracting Manual, department management memorandum, or information available on the department’s internet website, to reflect that adjustment.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 23.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

3503.

(a) An awarding authority shall require the successful bidder for a contract described in subdivision (b) to submit a current facility-specific Environmental Product Declaration, Type III, as defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard 14025, or similarly robust life cycle assessment methods that have uniform standards in data collection consistent with ISO standard 14025, industry acceptance, and integrity, for each eligible material proposed to be used.

(b) An awarding authority shall include in a specification for bids for an eligible project that the facility-specific global warming potential for any eligible material does not exceed the maximum acceptable global warming potential for that material determined pursuant to
 Section 3502. An awarding authority may include in a specification for bids for an eligible project a facility-specific global warming potential for any eligible material that is lower than the maximum acceptable global warming potential for that material determined pursuant to Section 3502.

(c) A successful bidder for a contract described in subdivision (b) shall not install any eligible materials on the project until that bidder submits a facility-specific Environmental Product Declaration for that material pursuant to subdivision (a).

(d) This section shall only apply to a contract entered into on or after July 1, 2022.

(e) This section shall not apply to an eligible material for a particular contract if the awarding authority determines, upon written justification published on its internet website, that requiring those eligible materials to comply would be technically infeasible, would result in a significant increase in the project cost or a significant delay in completion, or would result in only one source or manufacturer being able to provide the type of material needed by the state.

(f) This section shall not apply if the awarding authority determines that an emergency exists, as defined in Section 1102, or that any of the circumstances described in subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of Section 10122 exist.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 24.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

3504.

In carrying out its duties under this article, an awarding authority shall strive to achieve a continuous reduction of emissions over time.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 816, Sec. 3.   (AB 262)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

3505.

The department, by July 1, 2023, shall submit a report to the Legislature on any obstacles to the implementation of this article, and the effectiveness of this article to reduce global warming potential. The report required by this section shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 25.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4. Subletting and Subcontracting [4100. - 4114.]

4100.

This chapter may be cited as the “Subletting and Subcontracting Fair Practices Act.”

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4101.

The Legislature finds that the practices of bid shopping and bid peddling in connection with the construction, alteration, and repair of public improvements often result in poor quality of material and workmanship to the detriment of the public, deprive the public of the full benefits of fair competition among prime contractors and subcontractors, and lead to insolvencies, loss of wages to employees, and other evils.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4103.

Nothing in this chapter limits or diminishes any rights or remedies, either legal or equitable, which:

(a) An original or substituted subcontractor may have against the prime contractor, his or her successors or assigns.

(b) The state or any county, city, body politic, or public agency may have against the prime contractor, his or her successors or assigns, including the right to take over and complete the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4104.

Any officer, department, board, or commission taking bids for the construction of any public work or improvement shall provide in the specifications prepared for the work or improvement or in the general conditions under which bids will be received for the doing of the work incident to the public work or improvement that any person making a bid or offer to perform the work, shall, in his or her bid or offer, set forth:

(a) (1) The name, the location of the place of business, the California contractor license number, and public works contractor registration number issued pursuant to Section 1725.5 of the Labor Code of each subcontractor who will perform work or labor or render service to the prime contractor in or about the construction of the work or improvement, or
 a subcontractor licensed by the State of California who, under subcontract to the prime contractor, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications, in an amount in excess of one-half of 1 percent of the prime contractor’s total bid or, in the case of bids or offers for the construction of streets or highways, including bridges, in excess of one-half of 1 percent of the prime contractor’s total bid or ten thousand dollars ($10,000), whichever is greater.

(2) An inadvertent error in listing the California contractor license number or public works contractor registration number provided pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not be grounds for filing a bid protest or grounds for considering the bid nonresponsive if the corrected contractor’s license number is submitted to the public entity by the prime contractor within 24 hours after the bid opening and
 provided the corrected contractor’s license number corresponds to the submitted name and location for that subcontractor.

(3) (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), any information requested by the officer, department, board, or commission concerning any subcontractor who the prime contractor is required to list under this subdivision, other than the subcontractor’s name, location of business, the California contractor license number, and the public works contractor registration number, may be submitted by the prime contractor up to 24 hours after the deadline established by the officer, department, board, or commission for receipt of bids by prime contractors.

(B) A state or local agency may implement subparagraph (A) at its option.

(b) The portion of the work that will be done by each subcontractor
 under this act. The prime contractor shall list only one subcontractor for each portion as is defined by the prime contractor in his or her bid.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 28, Sec. 90.   (SB 96)   Effective June 27, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

4104.5.

(a) The officer, department, board, or commission taking bids for construction of any public work or improvement shall specify in the bid invitation and public notice the place the bids of the prime contractors are to be received and the time by which they shall be received. The date and time shall be extended by no less than 72 hours if the officer, department, board, or commission issues any material changes, additions, or deletions to the invitation later than 72 hours prior to the bid closing. Any bids received after the time specified
 in the notice or any extension due to material changes shall be returned unopened.

(b) As used in this section, the term “material change” means a change with a substantial cost impact on the total bid as determined by the awarding agency.

(c) As used in this section, the term “bid invitation” shall include any documents issued to prime contractors that contain descriptions of the work to be bid or the content, form, or manner of submission of bids by bidders.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 204, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

4105.

Circumvention by a general contractor who bids as a prime contractor of the requirement under Section 4104 for him or her to list his or her subcontractors, by the device of listing another contractor who will in turn sublet portions constituting the majority of the work covered by the prime contract, shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall subject that prime contractor to the penalties set forth in Sections 4110 and 4111.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4106.

If a prime contractor fails to specify a subcontractor or if a prime contractor specifies more than one subcontractor for the same portion of work to be performed under the contract in excess of one-half of 1 percent of the prime contractor’s total bid, the prime contractor agrees that he or she is fully qualified to perform that portion himself or herself, and that the prime contractor shall perform that portion himself or herself.

If after award of contract, the prime contractor subcontracts, except as provided for in Sections 4107 or 4109, any such portion of the work, the prime contractor shall be subject to
 the penalties named in Section 4111.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4107.

A prime contractor whose bid is accepted may not:

(a) Substitute a person as subcontractor in place of the subcontractor listed in the original bid, except that the awarding authority, or its duly authorized officer, may, except as otherwise provided in Section 4107.5, consent to the substitution of another person as a subcontractor in any of the following
 situations:

(1) When the subcontractor listed in the bid, after having had a reasonable opportunity to do so, fails or refuses to execute a written contract for the scope of work specified in the subcontractor’s bid and at the price specified in the subcontractor’s bid, when that written contract, based upon the general terms, conditions, plans, and specifications for the project involved or the terms of that subcontractor’s written bid, is presented to the subcontractor by the prime contractor.

(2) When the listed subcontractor becomes insolvent or the subject of an order for relief in bankruptcy.

(3) When the listed subcontractor fails or refuses to perform his or her subcontract.

(4) When the listed subcontractor fails or refuses to meet the bond
 requirements of the prime contractor as set forth in Section 4108.

(5) When the prime contractor demonstrates to the awarding authority, or its duly authorized officer, subject to the further provisions set forth in Section 4107.5, that the name of the subcontractor was listed as the result of an inadvertent clerical error.

(6) When the listed subcontractor is not licensed pursuant to the Contractors License Law.

(7) When the awarding authority, or its duly authorized officer, determines that the work performed by the listed subcontractor is substantially unsatisfactory and not in substantial accordance with the plans and specifications, or that the subcontractor is substantially delaying or disrupting the progress of the work.

(8) When the listed
 subcontractor is ineligible to work on a public works project pursuant to Section 1777.1 or 1777.7 of the Labor Code.

(9) When the awarding authority determines that a listed subcontractor is not a responsible contractor.

Prior to approval of the prime contractor’s request for the substitution, the awarding authority, or its duly authorized officer, shall give notice in writing to the listed subcontractor of the prime contractor’s request to substitute and of the reasons for the request. The notice shall be served by certified or registered mail to the last known address of the subcontractor. The listed subcontractor who has been so notified has five working days within which to submit written objections to the substitution to the awarding authority. Failure to file these written objections constitutes the listed subcontractor’s consent to the substitution.

If
 written objections are filed, the awarding authority shall give notice in writing of at least five working days to the listed subcontractor of a hearing by the awarding authority on the prime contractor’s request for substitution.

(b) Permit a subcontract to be voluntarily assigned or transferred or allow it to be performed by anyone other than the original subcontractor listed in the original bid, without the consent of the awarding authority, or its duly authorized officer.

(c) Other than in the performance of “change orders” causing changes or deviations from the original contract, sublet or subcontract any portion of the work in excess of one-half of 1 percent of the prime contractor’s total bid as to which his or her original bid did not designate a subcontractor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 500, Sec. 58.   (AB 1059)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

4107.2.

No subcontractor listed by a prime contractor under Section 4104 as furnishing and installing carpeting, shall voluntarily sublet his or her subcontract with respect to any portion of the labor to be performed unless he or she specified the subcontractor in his or her bid for that subcontract to the prime contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4107.5.

The prime contractor as a condition to assert a claim of inadvertent clerical error in the listing of a subcontractor shall within two working days after the time of the prime bid opening by the awarding authority give written notice to the awarding authority and copies of that notice to both the subcontractor he or she claims to have listed in error and the intended subcontractor who had bid to the prime contractor prior to bid opening.

Any listed subcontractor who has been notified by the prime contractor in accordance with this section as to an inadvertent clerical error shall be allowed six working days
 from the time of the prime bid opening within which to submit to the awarding authority and to the prime contractor written objection to the prime contractor’s claim of inadvertent clerical error. Failure of the listed subcontractor to file the written notice within the six working days shall be primary evidence of his or her agreement that an inadvertent clerical error was made.

The awarding authority shall, after a public hearing as provided in Section 4107 and in the absence of compelling reasons to the contrary, consent to the substitution of the intended subcontractor:

(a) If (1) the prime contractor, (2) the subcontractor listed in error, and (3) the intended subcontractor each submit an affidavit to the awarding authority along with such additional evidence as the parties may wish to submit that an inadvertent clerical error was in fact made, provided that the affidavits from each of the three
 parties are filed within eight working days from the time of the prime bid opening, or

(b) If the affidavits are filed by both the prime contractor and the intended subcontractor within the specified time but the subcontractor whom the prime contractor claims to have listed in error does not submit within six working days, to the awarding authority and to the prime contractor, written objection to the prime contractor’s claim of inadvertent clerical error as provided in this section.

If the affidavits are filed by both the prime contractor and the intended subcontractor but the listed subcontractor has, within six working days from the time of the prime bid opening, submitted to the awarding authority and to the prime contractor written objection to the prime contractor’s claim of inadvertent clerical error, the awarding authority shall investigate the claims of the parties and shall hold a public
 hearing as provided in Section 4107 to determine the validity of those claims. Any determination made shall be based on the facts contained in the declarations submitted under penalty of perjury by all three parties and supported by testimony under oath and subject to cross-examination. The awarding authority may, on its own motion or that of any other party, admit testimony of other contractors, any bid registries or depositories, or any other party in possession of facts which may have a bearing on the decision of the awarding authority.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4107.7.

If a contractor who enters into a contract with a public entity for investigation,
 removal or remedial action, or disposal relative to the release or presence of a hazardous material or hazardous waste fails to pay a subcontractor registered as a hazardous waste hauler pursuant to Section 25163 of the Health and Safety Code within 10 days after the investigation, removal or remedial action, or disposal is completed, the subcontractor may serve a stop notice upon the public entity in accordance with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 9350) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 43.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

4108.

(a) It shall be the responsibility of each subcontractor submitting bids to a prime contractor to be prepared to submit a faithful performance and payment bond or bonds if so requested by the prime contractor. 

(b) In the event any subcontractor submitting a bid to a prime contractor does not, upon the request of the prime contractor and at the expense of the prime contractor at the established charge or premium therefor, furnish to the prime contractor a bond or bonds issued by an admitted surety wherein the prime contractor shall be named the obligee, guaranteeing
 prompt and faithful performance of the subcontract and the payment of all claims for labor and materials furnished or used in and about the work to be done and performed under the subcontract, the prime contractor may reject the bid and make a substitution of another subcontractor subject to Section 4107. 

(c) (1) The bond or bonds may be required under this section only if the prime contractor in his or her written or published request for subbids clearly specifies the amount and requirements of the bond or bonds.

(2) If the expense of the bond or bonds required under this section is to be borne by the subcontractor, that requirement shall also be specified in the prime contractor’s written or published request for subbids. 

(3) The prime contractor’s failure to specify bond requirements, in
 accordance with this subdivision, in the written or published request for subbids shall preclude the prime contractor from imposing bond requirements under this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1991, Ch. 754, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

4109.

Subletting or subcontracting of any portion of the work in excess of one-half of 1 percent of the prime contractor’s total bid as to which no subcontractor was designated in the original bid shall only be permitted in cases of public emergency or necessity, and then only after a finding reduced to writing as a public record of the awarding authority setting forth the facts constituting the emergency or necessity.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4110.

A prime contractor violating any of the provisions of this chapter violates his or her contract and the awarding authority may exercise the option, in its own discretion, of (1) canceling his or her contract or (2) assessing the prime contractor a penalty in an amount of not more than 10 percent of the amount of the subcontract involved, and this penalty shall be deposited in the fund out of which the prime contract is awarded. In any proceedings under this section the prime contractor shall be entitled to a public hearing and to five days’ notice of the time and place thereof.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4111.

Violation of this chapter by a licensee under Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code constitutes grounds for disciplinary action by the Contractors State License Board, in addition to the penalties prescribed in Section 4110.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4112.

The failure on the part of a contractor to comply with any provision of this chapter does not constitute a defense to the contractor in any action brought against the contractor by a subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4113.

As used in this chapter, the word “subcontractor” shall mean a contractor, within the meaning of the provisions of Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, who contracts directly with the prime contractor.

“Prime contractor” shall mean the contractor who contracts directly with the awarding authority.

(History: Added by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 42.1.)
-------------------------------------------

4114.

The county board of supervisors, when it is the awarding authority, may delegate its functions under Sections 4107 and 4110 to any officer designated by the board.

The authorized officer shall make a written recommendation to the board of supervisors. The board of supervisors may adopt the recommendation without further notice or hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before the board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1989, Ch. 43, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 5. Relief of Bidders [5100. - 5110.]

5100.

(a) “Public entity” means the state, Regents of the University of California, a county, city and county, city, district, public authority, public agency, and any other political subdivision or public corporation in the state.

(b) “Bid” means any proposal submitted to a public entity in competitive bidding for the construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any structure, building, road or other improvement of any kind.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 435, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

5101.

(a) A bidder shall not be relieved of the bid unless by consent of the awarding authority nor shall any change be made in the bid because of mistake, but the bidder may bring an action against the public entity in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county in which the bids were opened for the recovery of the amount forfeited, without interest or costs. If the plaintiff fails to recover judgment, the plaintiff shall pay all costs incurred by the public entity in the suit, including a reasonable attorney’s fee to be fixed by the
 court.

(b) If an awarding authority for the state consents to relieve a bidder of a bid because of mistake, the authority shall prepare a report in writing to document the facts establishing the existence of each element required by Section 5103. The report shall be available for inspection as a public record. In the case of the University of California or a California State University, the report shall be filed with the regents and the trustees, respectively, and shall be available as a public record.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 726, Sec. 21.   Effective September 22, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

5102.

The complaint shall be filed, and summons served on the director of the department or the chief of the division or other head of the public entity under which the work is to be performed or an appearance made, within 90 days after the opening of the bid; otherwise, the action shall be dismissed.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 435, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

5103.

The bidder shall establish to the satisfaction of the court that:

(a) A mistake was made.

(b) He or she gave the public entity written notice within five working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and state holidays, after the opening of the bids of the mistake, specifying in the notice in detail how the mistake occurred.

(c) The mistake made the bid materially different
 than he or she intended it to be.

(d) The mistake was made in filling out the bid and not due to error in judgment or to carelessness in inspecting the site of the work, or in reading the plans or specifications.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 270, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

5104.

Other than the notice to the public entity, no claim is required to be filed before bringing the action.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 435, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

5105.

A bidder who claims a mistake or who forfeits his or her bid security shall be prohibited from participating in further bidding on the project on which the mistake was claimed or security forfeited.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 435, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

5106.

If the public entity deems it is for its best interest, it may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the second lowest bidder.

If the second lowest bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the public entity may likewise award it to the third lowest bidder.

On the failure or refusal of the second or third lowest bidder to whom a contract is so awarded to execute it, his or her bidder’s security shall be likewise forfeited.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 435, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

5107.

In all actions brought under the provisions of this chapter, all courts wherein such actions are or may hereafter be pending, shall give such actions preference over all other civil actions therein, in the matter of setting the same for hearing or trial, and in hearing the same, to the end that all such actions shall be quickly heard and determined.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 435, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

5110.

(a) When a project for the construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any structure, building, or road, or other improvement of any kind is competitively bid and any intended or actual award of the contract is challenged, the contract may be entered into pending final decision of the challenge, subject to the requirements of this section. If the contract is later determined to be invalid due to a defect or defects in the competitive bidding process caused solely by the public entity, the contractor who entered into the contract with
 the public entity shall be entitled to be paid the reasonable cost, specifically excluding profit, of the labor, equipment, materials, and services furnished by the contractor prior to the date of the determination that the contract is invalid if all of the following conditions are met:

(1) The contractor proceeded with construction, alteration, repair, or improvement based upon a good faith belief that the contract was valid.

(2) The public entity has reasonably determined that the work performed is satisfactory.

(3) Contractor fraud did not occur in the obtaining or performance of the contract.

(4) The contract does not otherwise violate statutory or constitutional limitations.

(b) In no
 event shall payment to the contractor pursuant to this section exceed either of the following:

(1) The contractor’s costs as included in its bid plus the cost of any approved change orders.

(2) The amount of the contract less profit at the point in time the contract is determined to be invalid.

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), this section shall not affect any protest and legal proceedings, whether contractual, administrative, or judicial, to challenge the award of the public works contract and enforce competitive bidding laws, nor affect any rights under Section 337.1 or 337.15 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 678, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6. Awarding of Contracts [6100. - 6615.]

6100.

(a) A state agency, as defined in Section 10335.7 that is subject to this code, shall, prior to awarding a contract for work to be performed by a contractor, as defined by Section 7026 of the Business and Professions Code, verify with the Contractors State License Board that the person seeking the contract is licensed in a classification appropriate to the work to be undertaken. Verification as required by this section need only be made once every two years with respect to the same contractor.

(b) In lieu of the verification, the state entity may require the person seeking the contract to present his or her pocket license or certificate of licensure and provide a signed statement
 which swears, under penalty of perjury, that the pocket license or certificate of licensure presented is his or hers, is current and valid, and is in a classification appropriate to the work to be undertaken.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 303, Sec. 419.   (AB 731)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

6101.

(a) A state agency, as defined in Section 10335.7, that is subject to this code, shall not award a public works or purchase contract to a bidder or contractor, nor shall a bidder or contractor be eligible to bid for or receive a public works or purchase contract, who has, in the preceding five years, been convicted of violating a state or federal law respecting the employment of undocumented immigrants.

(b) For purposes of this section, “immigrant” means a person who is not a citizen or national of the United States.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 296, Sec. 55.   (AB 1096)   Effective January 1, 2022.)
-------------------------------------------

6102.

(a) A contract that was entered into because of an act that would constitute a violation of a state or federal crime relating to bribery of a public official, including, but not limited to, a violation of Section 68 or 86 of the Penal Code is voidable.

(b) This section applies to contracts executed on or after
 January 1, 2023, including contracts negotiated prior to January 1, 2023.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 297, Sec. 1.   (SB 34)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

6106.

(a) Any state agency or department, which is subject to this code, shall follow this section in negotiating fees and executing a contract for professional consulting services of a private architectural, engineering, land surveying, environmental, or construction project management firm.

(b) After providing notification to the successful firm of its selection, the state shall provide written instructions for the negotiations which are to follow. These instructions shall provide the private consulting firm with necessary information which shall allow the negotiations to
 proceed in an orderly fashion. Negotiations shall begin within 14 days after the successful firm has been notified of its selection or upon receipt of the cost proposal. The contractor should be notified if additional time is necessary to begin negotiations.

(c) Upon the completion of negotiations, the state and the private firm shall proceed to execute a contract so that the contract may be completed by the state within 45 days. The contractor should be notified if additional time is necessary to complete the contract. The state and private firm shall work together to ensure the successful delivery of the requested services in a timely fashion. 

(d) In the event that an impasse is reached in negotiations, the state agency or department may terminate negotiations and enter into negotiations with the next most qualified firm as prescribed in Section 4528 of the Government
 Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1128, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

6106.5.

(a) “State agency,” as used in this section, means those departments defined in Section 10106 of the Public Contract Code.

(b) “Contractor,” as used in this section, means “firm,” “architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, and land surveying services,” “construction project management,” and “environmental services” as defined in Section 4525 of the Government Code.

(c) State agencies
 shall include a provision in solicitations and in contracts, if the estimated amount to be retained exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), and the retention continues for a period of 60 days beyond the completion of phased services, to permit, upon written request and the expense of the contractor, the payment of retentions earned directly to a state- or federally chartered bank in this state, as the escrow agent. The contractor may direct the investment of the payments into securities, pursuant to subdivision (d), and the contractor shall receive the interest earned on the investments. Upon satisfactory completion of the contract, the contractor shall receive from the escrow agent all securities, interest, and payments received by the escrow agent from the owner, pursuant to the terms of this section. State agencies, relative to contracts entered into prior to the enactment of this section, upon written request of the contractor, and subject to the approval of the state agency, may utilize the provisions
 of this section.

(d) Securities eligible for investment under this section shall include those listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code, interest-bearing demand deposit accounts, or any other investment mutually agreed to by the contractor and the state agency.

(e) (1) Any contractor who elects to receive interest on moneys withheld in retention by a state agency shall, at the request of any subcontractor, make that option available to the subcontractor regarding any moneys withheld in retention by the contractor from the subcontractor. If the contractor elects to receive interest on any moneys withheld in retention by a state agency, then the subcontractor shall receive the identical rate of interest received by the contractor on any retention moneys withheld from the subcontractor by the contractor, less any actual pro rata costs associated with
 administering and calculating that interest. In the event that the interest rate is a fluctuating rate, the rate for the subcontractor shall be determined by calculating the interest rate paid during the time that retentions were withheld from the subcontractor. If the contractor elects to substitute securities in lieu of retention, then, by mutual consent of the contractor and subcontractor, the subcontractor may substitute securities in exchange for the release of moneys held in retention by the contractor.

(2) This subdivision shall apply only to those subcontractors performing more than 5 percent of the contractor’s total fee.

(3) No contractor shall require any subcontractor to waive any provision of this section.

(f) An escrow agreement used pursuant to this section shall be null, void, and unenforceable unless
 it is substantially similar to the following form:ESCROW AGREEMENT FOR SECURITY DEPOSITSThis Escrow Agreement is made and entered into by and betweenwhose address ishereinafter called “owner,”whose address ishereinafter called “contractor,” andwhose address ishereinafter called “escrow agent.”(1) Pursuant to Section 6106.5 of the Public Contract Code of the State of California, upon written request of the contractor, the owner shall make payments of retention earnings required to be withheld by the owner pursuant to the professional consulting services agreement entered into between the owner and contractor for ____ in the amount of ____ dated ____ hereafter referred to as the “contract.”

(2) When the owner makes payment of retentions earned directly to the escrow agent, the escrow agent shall hold them for the benefit of the contractor until such time as the escrow created under this contract is terminated. The contractor may direct the investment of the
 payments into securities pursuant to Section 6106.5(d) of the Public Contract Code. All terms and conditions of this agreement and the rights and responsibilities of the parties shall be equally applicable and binding when the owner pays the escrow agent directly.

(3) The contractor shall be responsible for paying all fees for the expenses incurred by the escrow agent in administering the escrow account. These expenses and payment terms shall be determined by the contractor and escrow agent.

(4) The contractor shall have the right to withdraw all or any part of the principal or interest in the escrow account only by written notice to the escrow agent accompanied by written authorization from the owner to the escrow agent that the owner consents to the withdrawal of the amount sought to be withdrawn by contractor.

(5) The owner shall have a right to draw upon the escrow account in the event of default by the contractor. Upon seven days’ written notice to the escrow agent from the owner of the default, the escrow agent shall immediately distribute the cash as instructed by the owner.

(6) Upon receipt of written notification from the owner certifying that the contract is final and complete, and that the contractor has complied with all requirements and procedures applicable to the contract, the escrow agent shall release to the contractor all deposits and interest on deposits less escrow fees and charges of the escrow account. The escrow shall be closed immediately upon disbursement of all moneys on deposit and payments of fees and charges.

(7) The escrow agent shall rely on the written notifications from the owner and the contractor pursuant to Sections (1) to (6), inclusive, of
 this agreement and the owner and contractor shall hold the escrow agent harmless from the escrow agent’s release, conversion, and disbursement of the securities and interest as set forth above.

(8) The names of the persons who are authorized to give written notice or to receive written notice on behalf of the owner and on behalf of the contractor in connection with the foregoing, and exemplars of their respective signatures are as follows:On behalf of the owner:
On behalf of the contractor:
Title
Title
Name
Name
Address
Address
On behalf of the escrow agent:
Title
Name
Signature
Address
At the time the escrow account is opened, the owner and contractor shall deliver to the escrow agent a fully executed counterpart of this Agreement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement by their proper officers on the date first set forth above.Owner
Contractor
Title
Title
Name
Name
Signature
Signature

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 22, Sec. 154.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

6107.

(a) As used in this section, “California company” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity that was a licensed California contractor on the date when bids for the public contract were opened and meets one of the following:

(1) Has its principal place of business in California.

(2) Has its principal place of business in a state in which there is no local
 contractor preference on construction contracts.

(3) Has its principal place of business in a state in which there is a local contractor construction preference and the contractor has paid not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) in sales or use taxes to California for construction related activity for each of the five years immediately preceding the submission of the bid.

(b) (1) When awarding contracts for construction, a state agency shall grant a California company a reciprocal preference as against a nonresident contractor from any state that gives or requires a preference to be given contractors from that state on its public entity construction contracts.

(2) The amount of the reciprocal preference shall be equal to the amount of the preference applied by the state of the nonresident
 contractor with the lowest responsive bid, except where the resident contractor is eligible for a California small business preference, in which case the preference applied shall be the greater of the two, but not both.

(3) If the contractor submitting the lowest responsive bid is not a California company and has its principal place of business in any state that gives or requires the giving of a preference on its public entity construction contracts to contractors from that state, and if a California company has also submitted a responsive bid, and, with the benefit of the reciprocal preference, the California company’s bid is equal to or less than the original lowest responsive bid, the public entity shall award the contract to the California company at its submitted bid price.

(c) (1) The bidder shall certify, under penalty of perjury, that the bidder
 qualifies as a California company.

(2) A nonresident contractor shall, at the time of bidding, disclose to the awarding agency any and all bid preferences provided to the nonresident contractor by the state or country in which the nonresident contractor has its principal place of business.

(d) The reciprocal preference is waived if the certification described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) does not appear on the bid.

(e) This section does not apply if application of this section might jeopardize the receipt of federal funds or the nonresident contractor certifies, under penalty of perjury, in its bid that its state of residency does not give a preference for contractors from that state on its public entity construction contracts.

(f) “Construction
 related activity” shall include, without limitation, any activity for which a California contractors’ license is required.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1996, Ch. 279, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1997.)
-------------------------------------------

6108.

(a) (1) Every contract entered into by any state agency for the procurement or laundering of apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories, or the procurement of equipment, materials, or supplies, other than procurement related to a public works contract, shall require that a contractor certify that no apparel, garments, corresponding accessories, equipment, materials, or supplies furnished to the state pursuant to the contract have been laundered or produced in whole or in part by sweatshop labor, forced labor, convict labor, indentured labor under penal sanction, abusive forms of child labor, or exploitation of children in sweatshop labor, or with the benefit of sweatshop labor, forced labor, convict labor, indentured
 labor under penal sanction, abusive forms of child labor, or exploitation of children in sweatshop labor. The contractor shall agree to comply with this provision of the contract.

(2) The contract shall specify that the contractor is required to cooperate fully in providing reasonable access to the contractor’s records, documents, agents, employees, or premises if reasonably required by authorized officials of the contracting agency, the Department of Industrial Relations, or the Department of Justice determine the contractor’s compliance with the requirements under paragraph (1).

(b) (1) Any contractor contracting with the state who knew or should have known that the apparel, garments, corresponding accessories, equipment, materials, or supplies
 furnished to the state were laundered or produced in violation of the conditions specified in subdivision (a) when entering into a contract pursuant to subdivision (a), may, subject to subdivision (c), have any or all of the following sanctions imposed:

(A) The contract under which the prohibited apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories, equipment, materials, or supplies were laundered or provided may be voided at the option of the state agency to which the equipment, materials, or supplies were provided.

(B) The contractor may be assessed a penalty that shall be the greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or an amount equaling 20 percent of the value of the apparel, garments, corresponding accessories, equipment, materials, or supplies that the state agency demonstrates
 were produced in violation of the conditions specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) and that were supplied to the state agency under the contract.

(C) The contractor may be removed from the bidder’s list for a period not to exceed 360 days.

(2) Any moneys collected pursuant to this subdivision shall be deposited into the General Fund.

(c) (1) When imposing the sanctions described in subdivision (b), the contracting agency shall notify the contractor of the right to a hearing, if requested, within 15 days of the date of the notice. The hearing shall be before an administrative law judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings in accordance with the procedures specified in Chapter 5 (commencing
 with Section 11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code. The administrative law judge shall take into consideration any measures the contractor has taken to ensure compliance with this section, and may waive any or all of the sanctions if it is determined that the contractor has acted in good faith.

(2) The agency shall be assessed the cost of the administrative hearing, unless the agency has prevailed in the hearing, in which case the contractor shall be assessed the cost of the hearing.

(d) (1) Any state agency that investigates a complaint against a contractor for violation of this section may limit its investigation to evaluating the information provided by the person or entity submitting the complaint and the information provided by the contractor.

(2) Whenever a contracting officer of the contracting agency has reason to believe that the contractor failed to comply with paragraph (1) of subdivision (a), the agency shall refer the matter for investigation to the head of the agency and, as the head of the agency determines appropriate, to either the Director of Industrial Relations or the Department of Justice.

(e) (1) For purposes of this section, “forced labor” shall have the same meaning as in Section 1307 of Title 19 of the United States Code.

(2) “Abusive forms of child labor” means any of the following:

(A) All forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, such as the sale
 and trafficking of children, debt bondage, and serfdom and forced or compulsory labor, including forced or compulsory recruitment of children for use in armed conflict.

(B) The use, procuring, or offering of a child for prostitution, for the production of pornography, or for pornographic performances.

(C) The use, procuring, or offering of a child for illicit activities, in particular for the production and trafficking of illicit drugs.

(D) All work or service exacted from or performed by any person under the age of 18 years either under the menace of any penalty for its nonperformance and for which the worker does not offer oneself voluntarily, or under a contract, the enforcement of which can be accomplished by process
 or penalties.

(E) All work or service exacted from or performed by a child in violation of all applicable laws of the country of manufacture governing the minimum age of employment, compulsory education, and occupational health and safety.

(3) “Exploitation of children in sweatshop labor” means all work or service exacted from or performed by any person under the age of 18 years in violation of more than one law of the country of manufacture governing wage and benefits, occupational health and safety, nondiscrimination, and freedom of association.

(4) “Sweatshop labor” means all work or service exacted from or performed by any person in violation of more than one law of the country of manufacture governing wages, employee
 benefits, occupational health, occupational safety, nondiscrimination, or freedom of association.

(5) “Apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories” includes, but is not limited to, uniforms.

(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, “forced labor” and “convict labor” do not include work or services performed by an inmate or a person employed by the
 California Correctional Training and Rehabilitation Authority.

(7) “State agency” means any state agency in this state.

(f) (1) On or before February 1, 2004, the Department of Industrial Relations shall establish a contractor responsibility program, including a Sweatfree Code of Conduct, to be signed by all bidders on state contracts and subcontracts. Any state agency responsible for procurement shall ensure that the Sweatfree Code of Conduct is available for public review at least 30 calendar days between the dates of receipt and the final award of the contract. The Sweatfree Code of Conduct shall list the requirements that contractors are required to meet, as set forth in subdivision (g).

(2) Upon implementation in the manner described in paragraph
 (4), every contract entered into by any state agency for the procurement or laundering of apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories, or for the procurement of equipment or supplies, shall require that the contractor certify in accordance with the Sweatfree Code of Conduct that no apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories, or equipment, materials, or supplies, furnished to the state pursuant to the contract have been laundered or produced, in whole or in part, by sweatshop labor.

(3) The appropriate procurement agency, in consultation with the Director of Industrial Relations, shall employ a phased and targeted approach to implementing the Sweatfree Code of Conduct. Sweatfree Code of Conduct procurement policies involving apparel, garments, and corresponding accessories may be permitted a phasein period of up to
 one year for purposes of feasibility and providing sufficient notice to contractors and the general public. The appropriate procurement agency, in consultation with the Director of Industrial Relations, shall target other procurement categories based on the magnitude of verified sweatshop conditions and the feasibility of implementation, and may set phasein goals and timetables of up to three years to achieve compliance with the principles of the Sweatfree Code of Conduct.

(4) In order to facilitate compliance with the Sweatfree Code of Conduct, the Department of Industrial Relations shall explore mechanisms employed by other governmental entities, including, but not limited to, New Jersey Executive Order No. 20, of 2002, to ensure that businesses that contract with this state are in compliance with this section and any regulations or
 requirements promulgated in conformance with this section, as amended by Section 2 of Chapter 711 of the Statutes of 2003. The mechanisms explored may include, but not be limited to, authorization to contract with a competent nonprofit organization that is neither funded nor controlled, in whole or in part, by a corporation that is engaged in the procurement or laundering of apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories, or the procurement of equipment, materials, or supplies. The Department of Industrial Relations, in complying with this paragraph, shall also consider any feasible and cost-effective monitoring measures that will encourage compliance with the Sweatfree Code of Conduct.

(5) To ensure public access and confidence, the Department of Industrial Relations shall ensure public awareness and access to proposed contracts by
 postings on the Internet and through communication to advocates for garment workers, unions, and other interested parties. The appropriate agencies shall establish a mechanism for soliciting and reviewing any information indicating violations of the Sweatfree Code of Conduct by prospective or current bidders, contractors, or subcontractors. The agencies shall make their findings public when they reject allegations against bidding or contracting parties.

(6) Contractors shall ensure that their subcontractors comply in writing with the Sweatfree Code of Conduct, under penalty of perjury. Contractors shall attach a copy of the Sweatfree Code of Conduct to the certification required by subdivision (a).

(g) No state agency may enter into a contract with any contractor unless the
 contractor meets the following requirements:

(1) Contractors and subcontractors in California shall comply with all appropriate state laws concerning wages, workplace safety, rights to association and assembly, and nondiscrimination standards as well as appropriate federal laws. Contractors based in other states in the United States shall comply with all appropriate laws of their states and appropriate federal laws. For contractors whose locations for manufacture or assembly are outside the United States, those contractors shall ensure that their subcontractors comply with the appropriate laws of countries where the facilities are located.

(2) Contractors and subcontractors shall maintain a policy of not terminating any employee except for just cause, and employees shall
 have access to a mediator or to a mediation process to resolve certain workplace disputes that are not regulated by the National Labor Relations Board.

(3) Contractors and subcontractors shall ensure that workers are paid, at a minimum, wages and benefits in compliance with applicable local, state, and national laws of the jurisdiction in which the labor, on behalf of the contractor or subcontractor, is performed. Whenever a state agency expends funds for the procurement or laundering of apparel, garments, or corresponding accessories, or the procurement of equipment, materials, or supplies, other than procurement related to a public works contract, the applicable labor standards established by the local jurisdiction through the exercise of either local police powers or local spending powers in which the labor, in compliance with the contract or
 purchase order for which the expenditure is made, is performed shall apply with regard to the contract or purchase order for which the expenditure is made, unless the applicable local standards are in conflict with, or are explicitly preempted by, state law. A state agency may not require, as a condition for the receipt of state funds or assistance, that a local jurisdiction refrain from applying the labor standards that are otherwise applicable to that local jurisdiction. The Department of Industrial Relations may, without incurring additional expenses, access information from any nonprofit organization, including, but not limited to, the World Bank, that gathers and disseminates data with respect to wages paid throughout the world, to allow the Department of Industrial Relations to determine whether contractors and subcontractors are compensating their employees at a level that enables those employees
 to live above the applicable poverty level.

(4) All contractors and subcontractors shall comply with the overtime laws and regulations of the country in which their employees are working.

(5) All overtime hours shall be worked voluntarily. Workers shall be compensated for overtime at either (A) the rate of compensation for regular hours of work, or (B) as legally required in the country of manufacture, whichever is greater.

(6) No person may be employed who is younger than the legal age for children to work in the country in which the facility is located. In no case may children under the age of 15 years be employed in the manufacturing process. Where the age for completing compulsory education is higher than the
 standard for the minimum age of employment, the age for completing education shall apply to this section.

(7) There may be no form of forced labor of any kind, including slave labor, prison labor, indentured labor, or bonded labor, including forced overtime hours.

(8) The work environment shall be safe and healthy and, at a minimum, be in compliance with relevant local, state, and national laws. If residential facilities are provided to workers, those facilities shall be safe and healthy as well.

(9) There may be no discrimination in hiring, salary, benefits,
 performance evaluation, discipline, promotion, retirement, or dismissal on the basis of age, sex, pregnancy, maternity leave status, marital status, race, nationality, country of origin, ethnic origin, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, or political opinion.

(10) No worker may be subjected to any physical, sexual, psychological, or verbal harassment or abuse, including corporal punishment, under any circumstances, including, but not limited to, retaliation for exercising their right to free speech and assembly.

(11) No worker may be forced to use contraceptives or take pregnancy tests. No worker may be exposed to chemicals, including glues and solvents, that endanger reproductive health.

(12) Contractors and bidders shall list the names and addresses of each subcontractor to be utilized in the performance of the contract, and list each manufacturing or other facility or operation of the contractor or subcontractor for performance of the contract. The list, which shall be maintained and updated to show any changes in subcontractors during the term of the contract, shall provide company names, owners or officers, addresses, telephone numbers, e-mail addresses, and the nature of the business association.

(h) Any person who certifies as true any material matter pursuant to this section that they know to be false is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(i) The provisions of this section, as amended by Section 2 of Chapter 711 of the Statutes of 2003, shall be in
 addition to any other provisions that authorize the prosecution and enforcement of local labor laws and may not be interpreted to prohibit a local prosecutor from bringing a criminal or civil action against an individual or business that violates the provisions of this section.

(j) (1) The certification requirements set forth in subdivisions (a) and (f) do not apply to a credit card purchase of goods of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or less.

(2) The total amount of exemption authorized herein shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) per year for each company from which a state agency is purchasing goods by credit card. It shall be the responsibility of each state agency to monitor the use of this exemption and adhere to these
 restrictions on these purchases.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 241, Sec. 63.   (SB 857)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

6109.

(a) A public entity, as defined in Section 1100, may not permit a contractor or subcontractor who is ineligible to bid or work on, or be awarded, a public works project pursuant to Section 1777.1 or 1777.7 of the Labor Code to bid on, be awarded, or perform work as a subcontractor on, a public works project. Every public works project shall contain a provision prohibiting a contractor from performing work on a public works project with a subcontractor who is ineligible to perform work on the public works project pursuant to Section 1777.1 or
 1777.7 of the Labor Code.

(b) Any contract on a public works project entered into between a contractor and a debarred subcontractor is void as a matter of law. A debarred subcontractor may not receive any public money for performing work as a subcontractor on a public works contract, and any public money that may have been paid to a debarred subcontractor by a contractor on the project shall be returned to the awarding body. The contractor shall be responsible for the payment of wages to workers of a debarred subcontractor who has been allowed to work on the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 443, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

6610.

Notice inviting formal bids for projects by a public agency that include a requirement for any type of mandatory prebid conference, site visit, or meeting shall include the time, date, and location of the mandatory prebid site visit, conference or meeting, and when and where project documents, including final plans and specifications are available. Any mandatory prebid site visit, conference or meeting shall not occur within a minimum of five calendar days of the publication of the initial notice. This provision shall not apply to the Regents of the University of
 California.

(History: Added by Stats. 2000, Ch. 159, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

6611.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the Department of General Services may, relative to contracts for goods, services, information technology, and telecommunications, use a negotiation process if the department finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:

(1) The business need or purpose of a procurement or contract can be further defined as a result of a negotiation process.

(2) The business need or purpose of a procurement or contract is known by the department, but a negotiation process may identify different types of solutions to fulfill this business need or purpose.

(3) The complexity of the purpose or need suggests a bidder’s costs to prepare and develop a solicitation response are extremely high.

(4) The business need or purpose of a procurement or contract is known by the department, but negotiation is necessary to ensure that the department is receiving the best value or the most cost-efficient goods, services, information technology, and telecommunications.

(b) When it is in the best interests of the state, the department may negotiate amendments to the terms and conditions, including scope of work, of existing contracts for goods, services, information technology, and telecommunications, whether or not the original contract was the result of competition, on behalf of itself or another state agency.

(c) (1) The department shall establish the procedures and guidelines for the negotiation process described in subdivision (a). Those procedures and guidelines shall include, but not be limited to, a clear description of the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate a bid for the procurement of goods, services, information technology, and telecommunications.

(2) The procedures and guidelines described in paragraph (1) may include provisions that authorize the department to receive supplemental bids after the initial bids are opened. If the procedures and guidelines include these provisions, the procedures and guidelines shall specify the conditions under which supplemental bids may be received by the department.

(d) An unsuccessful bidder shall have no right to protest the results of the negotiating process undertaken pursuant to this section. As a remedy, an unsuccessful bidder may file a petition for a writ of mandate in accordance with Section 1085 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The venue for the petition for a writ of mandate shall be Sacramento, California. An action filed pursuant to this subdivision shall be given preference by the court.

(e) (1) The Department of Technology may utilize the negotiation process described in subdivisions (a) and (b) for the purpose of procuring information technology and telecommunications goods and services on behalf of state departments and information technology projects.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to supersede the department’s existing statutory control over procurement processes as dictated in Section 12100.

(f) On or before January 1, 2013, and annually thereafter, the Department of Technology shall report to the relevant budget subcommittees of each house of the Legislature on the use of subdivision (e) during budget hearings.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 335, Sec. 2.   (SB 1505)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

6615.

For all state contracts, and, to the extent feasible, all federally funded contracts awarded pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 10100), Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10290), Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 10700), Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 12120), and Chapter 3.6 (commencing with Section 12125) of Part 2 of Division 2 shall be in compliance with Section 12205.

(History: Added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 590, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6.3. Construction Manager/General Contractor Authority: Department of Transportation [6700. - 6708.]

6700.

(a) This chapter provides for an alternative procurement procedure for certain transportation projects performed by the Department of Transportation. 

(b) The Construction Manager/General Contractor method allows the department to engage a construction manager during the design process to provide input on the design. During the design phase, the construction manager provides advice including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the department to design a more constructible project.

(c) The Legislature finds and declares that utilizing a Construction Manager/General Contractor method requires a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of each participant in the
 process. The Legislature also finds and declares that cost-effective benefits are achieved by shifting the liability and risk for cost containment and project schedule to the construction manager and by permitting the coherent phasing of projects into discrete contract increments.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 465, Sec. 2.   (SB 1262)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

6701.

(a) The Construction Manager/General Contractor method provided by this chapter may be used by the department, but is not limited to, when it is anticipated that the Construction Manager/General Contractor method will reduce project costs or expedite project completion in a manner that is not achievable through the design-bid-build method. Notwithstanding any other law, for projects utilizing the Construction Manager/General Contractor method provided by this chapter, the department shall advertise, award, and administer the Construction Manager/General Contractor contract. The department shall not delegate the contracting authority, except for the two projects reserved for projects in the County of Riverside as provided for in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).

(b) (1) The department may use the Construction Manager/General Contractor method for projects that have construction costs greater than ten million dollars ($10,000,000).

(2) Consistent with Provision 2 of Item 2660-110-0042 of Section 2.00 of the Budget Act of 2016, as amended by Chapter 7 of the Statutes of 2017, two projects shall be authorized for projects in the County of Riverside and the Riverside County Transportation Commission may use the Construction Manager/General Contractor method for these projects, with the first priority for the projects listed in that budget item.

(c) On at least two-thirds of the projects delivered by the department utilizing the Construction Manager/General Contractor method provided by this chapter, the department shall use department employees or consultants under contract with the department to perform all
 project design and engineering services related to design required for Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery consistent with Article XXII of the California Constitution. On all projects delivered by the department, the department shall use department employees or consultants under contract with the department to perform all construction inspection services required for Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery consistent with Article XXII of the California Constitution. Department resources, including personnel requirements, necessary to perform all services described in this subdivision shall be included in the department’s capital outlay support program for workload purposes in the annual Budget Act.

(d) (1) The department shall prepare and submit to the Legislature an interim report no later than July 1, 2021, that describes
 each Construction Manager/General Contractor project approved under this chapter as of January 1, 2021, and that provides relevant data, including, but not limited to, district, cost, the stage of completion, and estimated time to completion. The department shall also prepare and submit to the Legislature a final report, no later than July 1, 2025, that provides the same relevant data for projects that were approved under this chapter as of January 1, 2025. Both the interim and final reports shall also provide a comprehensive assessment on the effectiveness of the Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery method relative to project cost and time savings.

(2) A report to be submitted pursuant to this subdivision shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 465, Sec. 3.   (SB 1262)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

6702.

As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:

(a) “Construction manager” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is a licensed contractor pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and that is able to provide, or that contracts with entities that are able to provide, appropriately licensed
 contracting or engineering services, or both appropriately licensed contracting and engineering services, as needed pursuant to a Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract.

(b) “Construction Manager/General Contractor method” means a project delivery method in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and construction services during the construction phase of the project. The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the contract for preconstruction services, or at a later time. The execution of the design and
 the construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(c) “Department” means the Department of Transportation as established under Part 5 (commencing with Section 14000) of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(d) “Preconstruction services” means advice during the design phase including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the department to design a more constructible project.

(e) “Project” means the construction of a highway, bridge, or tunnel.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 289, Sec. 1.   (AB 1475)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

6703.

Construction Manager/General Contractor method projects shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) The department shall establish a procedure for the evaluation and selection of a construction manager through a request for qualifications (RFQ). The RFQ shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(A) If the entity is a partnership, limited partnership, or other association, a list of all of the partners, general partners, or association members known at the time of the bid submission who will participate in the Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract, including, but not limited to, subcontractors.

(B) Evidence that the members of the entity have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the construction of the project, as well as a financial statement that assures the department that the entity has the capacity to complete the project, construction expertise, and an acceptable safety record.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to construct the project, including information on the revocation or suspension of any license, registration, or credential.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the
 entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Any prior serious or willful violation of the California Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1973, contained in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code, or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the entity, and information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) Information concerning any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project. Any instance in which an entity, its owners, officers, or managing employees submitted a bid on a public works
 project and were found to be nonresponsive, or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(G) Any instance in which the entity, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, defaulted on a construction contract.

(H) Any violations of the Contractors’ State License Law (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), excluding alleged violations of federal or state law including the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or of the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (26 U.S.C. Sec. 3101, et seq.) withholding requirements settled against any member of the entity.

(I) Information concerning the
 bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the entity, including information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(J) Information concerning all settled adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the entity during the five years preceding submission of a bid pursuant to this section, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this period.

(K) In the case of a partnership or other association that is not a legal entity, a copy of the agreement creating the partnership or association and specifying that all partners or association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the
 contract.

(L) For the purposes of this paragraph, a construction manager’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if the manager’s experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and the manager’s average total recordable injury/illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the manager is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(2) The information required pursuant to this subdivision shall be verified under oath by the entity and its members in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information that is not a public
 record pursuant to the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(b) For each RFQ, the department shall generate a final list of qualified persons or firms that participated in the RFQ prior to entering into negotiations on the contract or contracts to which the RFQ applies.

(c) (1) For each contract included in the RFQ, the department shall enter into separate negotiations for the contract with the highest qualified person or firm on the final list for that contract. However, if the RFQ is for multiple contracts and specifies that all of the multiple contracts will be awarded to a single construction manager, there may be a single negotiation for all of
 the multiple contracts. The negotiations shall include consideration of compensation and other contract terms that the department determines to be fair and reasonable to the department. In making this decision, the department shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity, and the nature of the professional services or construction services to be rendered. If the department is not able to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the highest qualified person or firm on the final list, regarding compensation and on other contract terms the department determines to be fair and reasonable, the department shall formally terminate negotiations with that person or firm. The department may undertake negotiations with the next most qualified person or firm on the final list in sequence until an agreement is reached or a determination is made to reject all persons or firms on the final list.

(2) If a contract for construction services is entered into pursuant to this chapter and includes preconstruction services by the construction manager, the department shall enter into a written contract with the construction manager for preconstruction services under which contract the department shall pay the construction manager a fee for preconstruction services in an amount agreed upon by the department and the construction manager. The preconstruction services contract may include fees for services to be performed during the contract period provided, however, the department shall not request or obtain a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price for the construction contract from the construction manager or enter into a construction contract with the construction manager until after the department has entered into a services contract.
 A preconstruction services contract shall provide for the subsequent negotiation for construction of all or any discreet phase or phases of the project.

(3) A contract for construction services shall be awarded after the plans have been sufficiently developed and either a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price has been successfully negotiated. In the event that a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price is not negotiated, the department shall not award the contract for construction services.

(4) The department is not required to award the construction services contract.

(5) Construction shall not commence on any phase, package, or element until the department and construction manager agree in writing on either
 a fixed price that the department will pay for the construction to be commenced or a guaranteed maximum price for the construction to be commenced and construction schedule for the project. The construction manager shall perform not less than 30 percent of the work covered by the fixed price or guaranteed maximum price agreement reached. Work that is not performed directly by the construction manager shall be bid to subcontractors pursuant to Section 6705.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 354.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

6704.

(a) Any construction manager that is selected to construct a project pursuant to this chapter shall possess or obtain sufficient bonding to cover the contract amount for construction services and risk and liability insurance as the department may require.

(b) Any payment or performance bond written for the purposes of this chapter shall be written using a bond form developed by the department.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 752, Sec. 1.   (AB 2498)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6705.

All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded the protections contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1. The construction manager shall do all of the following:

(a) Provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department.

(b) Provide a fixed date and time on which the subcontracted work will be awarded in accordance with the procedure established pursuant to this chapter

(c) Comply
 with any subcontracting procedures adopted by the department that were included in the department’s RFQ. If the department has adopted procedures to prequalify public works contractors, the construction manager may use the procedures to prequalify subcontractors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 752, Sec. 1.   (AB 2498)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6706.

The department may retain the services of a design professional or construction project manager, or both, throughout the course of the project in order to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 752, Sec. 1.   (AB 2498)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6707.

Contracts awarded pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until the project is completed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 752, Sec. 1.   (AB 2498)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6708.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to affect, expand, alter, or limit any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 752, Sec. 1.   (AB 2498)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6.5.  Transportation Design-Build Program [6820. - 6829.]

6820.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by objective criteria, including, but not limited to, price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, and other criteria deemed appropriate by the transportation entity.

(b) “Commission” means the California Transportation Commission.

(c) “Design-build” means
 a procurement process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity.

(d) “Design-build entity” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(e) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team.

(f) “Department” means the
 Department of Transportation as established under Part 5 (commencing with Section 14000) of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(g) “Expressway” means expressway as defined in Section 257 of the Streets and Highways Code. 

(h) “Interfacing with the state highway system” means work performed within the state highway right-of-way, including airspace over or under that property, or work performed upon property acquired by the department for construction of a state highway, including airspace over or under that property.

(i) “Regional transportation agency” means any of the following:

(1) A transportation planning agency described in Section 29532 or 29532.1 of the Government Code.

(2) A county transportation commission established under Section 130050, 130050.1, or 130050.2 of the Public Utilities Code.

(3) Any other local or regional transportation entity that is designated by statute as a regional transportation agency.

(4) A joint exercise of powers authority established pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code, with the consent of a transportation planning agency or a county transportation commission for the jurisdiction in which the transportation
 project will be developed.

(5) A local transportation authority designated pursuant to Division 12.5 (commencing with Section 131000) or Division 19 (commencing with Section 180000) of the Public Utilities Code.

(6) The Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority established pursuant to Part 12 (commencing with Section 100000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(j) “Transportation entity” means the department or a regional transportation agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   (AB 401)   Effective January 1, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6821.

(a) The department may utilize the design-build method of procurement for up to 10 projects, and an additional 6 projects per fiscal year in the 2022–23 and 2023–24 fiscal years, on the state highway system, based on either best value or lowest responsible bid.

(b) A regional transportation agency may utilize the design-build method of procurement to design and construct projects on or adjacent to the state highway system, including related nonhighway portions of the project, based on either best value or lowest responsible bid. A regional
 transportation agency and the department shall enter into a cooperative agreement reflecting the roles and responsibilities assigned by law for a project on or interfacing with the state highway system authorized under this subdivision. The cooperative agreement shall also include the requirement to develop a mutually agreed upon issue resolution process with a primary objective to ensure the project stays on schedule and issues between the parties are resolved in a timely manner.

(c) (1) A regional transportation agency may utilize the design-build method of procurement, based on either best value or lowest responsible bid, to design and construct projects on expressways that are not on the state highway system if the projects are developed in accordance with an expenditure plan approved by voters as of January 1, 2014.

(2) The entity responsible for the
 maintenance of the local streets and roads within the jurisdiction of the expressway shall be responsible for the maintenance of the expressway.

(d) A city, county, or city and county shall not utilize the design-build method of procurement under this chapter. A regional transportation agency shall not utilize the design-build method of procurement on behalf of a city, county, or city and county.

(e) The design-build authorization in subdivisions (a) and (b) shall not include the authority to perform construction inspection services for projects on or interfacing with the state highway system, which shall be performed by the department consistent with Section 91.2 of the Streets and Highway Code.

(f) (1) Not later than the first day of July that occurs two years after a design-build contract is
 awarded, and each July 1 thereafter until a project is completed, the department or the regional transportation agency shall submit a report on the progress of the project and compliance with this section to the legislative policy committees having jurisdiction over transportation matters.

(2) The requirement of submitting a report imposed under paragraph (1) is inoperative on the first day of July four years after the first report was submitted, pursuant to Section 10231.5 of the Government Code.

(3) A report to be submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 71, Sec. 7.   (SB 198)   Effective June 30, 2022.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6822.

The commission shall use the guidelines developed pursuant to subdivision (e) of Section 6803, as it read on December 31, 2013, to provide a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity, that performs services for the transportation entity relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team. This conflict-of-interest policy shall apply to the transportation entity entering into design-build contracts authorized under this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   (AB 401)   Effective January 1, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6823.

(a) For contracts for public works projects awarded prior January 1, 2012, a transportation entity authorized to use the design-build method of procurement shall establish and enforce a labor compliance program containing the requirements outlined in Section 1771.5 of the Labor Code or shall contract with a third party to operate a labor compliance program containing the requirements outlined in Section 1771.5 of the Labor Code. This requirement shall not apply to projects where the transportation entity or design-build entity has entered into any collective bargaining agreement that binds all of the contractors performing work on the projects.

(b) For contracts for public works projects awarded on or
 after January 1, 2012, the project shall be subject to the requirements of Section 1771.4 of the Labor Code.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 28, Sec. 76.   (SB 854)   Effective June 20, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6824.

The procurement process for the design-build project shall progress as follows:

(a) A transportation entity shall prepare a set of documents setting forth the scope and estimated price of a project. The documents may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans, and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the transportation entity’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in California.

(b) Based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), the transportation entity shall prepare a request for proposals that invites interested parties to submit competitive sealed proposals in the manner prescribed by the transportation entity. The request for proposals shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the estimated cost of the project, the methodology that will be used by the transportation entity to evaluate proposals, whether the contract will be awarded on the basis of the lowest responsible bid or on best value, and any other information deemed necessary by the transportation entity to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the transportation entity reasonably expects to consider in evaluating proposals, including, but not limited to, cost or price and all nonprice-related factors.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for proposals.

(4) For transportation entities authorized to utilize best value as a selection method, the transportation entity reserves the right to request proposal revisions and hold discussions and negotiations with responsive bidders and shall so specify in the request for proposals and shall publish separately or incorporate into the request for proposals applicable rules and procedures to be observed by the transportation entity to ensure that any discussions or negotiations are
 conducted in good faith.

(c) Based on the documents prepared under subdivision (a), the transportation entity shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to prequalify or short-list the design-build entities whose proposals shall be evaluated for final selection. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the transportation entity to evaluate proposals, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the transportation entity to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) (A) Significant factors that the transportation entity reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, skilled labor force availability, and all other nonprice-related factors.

(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), skilled labor force availability shall be determined by the existence of an agreement with a registered apprenticeship program, approved by the California Apprenticeship Council, that has graduated at least one apprentice in each of the preceding five years. This graduation requirement shall not apply to programs providing apprenticeship training for any craft that was first deemed by the Department of Labor and the Department of Industrial Relations to be an apprenticeable craft
 within the five years prior to the effective date of this article.

(3) A standard form request for statements of qualifications prepared by the transportation entity. In preparing the standard form, the transportation entity may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other public agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this chapter. The standard form shall require information including,
 but not limited to, all of the following:

(A) If the design-build entity is a partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, or other association, a listing of all of the partners, general partners, or association members known at the time of statement of qualification submission who will participate in the design-build contract.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build entity have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that assures the transportation entity that the design-build
 entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) A full disclosure regarding all of the following that are applicable:

(i) Any serious or willful violation of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the design-build entity.

(ii) Any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project.

(iii) Any instance where the design-build entity, or its owners, officers, or managing employees submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(iv) Any instance where the design-build entity, or its owners, officers, or managing employees defaulted on a construction contract.

(v) Any violations of the Contractors’ State License Law, as described in Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, including alleged violations of federal or state law regarding the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) withholding requirements settled against any member of the design-build entity.

(vi) Any bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the design-build entity, including, but not limited to, information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(vii) Any settled adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any
 member of the design-build entity during the five years preceding submission of a bid under this article, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this five-year period.

(G) If the proposed design-build entity is a partnership, limited partnership, joint-venture, or other association, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization, and a statement that all general partners, joint venture members, or other association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the design-build contract.

(H) An acceptable safety record. A bidder’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience
 modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury/illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the bidder is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(4) The information required under this subdivision shall be verified under oath by the design-build entity and its members in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information required under this subdivision that is not a public record under the California Public Records Act, as described in Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code, shall not be open to public
 inspection.

(d) For those projects utilizing low bid as the final selection method, the competitive bidding process shall result in lump-sum bids by the prequalified or short-listed design-build entities. Awards shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder.

(e) For those projects utilizing best value as a selection method, the design-build competition shall progress as follows:

(1) Competitive proposals shall be evaluated by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for proposals. However, the following minimum factors shall be weighted as deemed appropriate by the contracting transportation entity:

(A) Price.

(B) Technical design and construction expertise.

(C) Life-cycle costs over 15 years or more.

(2) Pursuant to subdivision (b), the transportation entity may hold discussions or negotiations with responsive bidders using the process articulated in the transportation entity’s request for proposals.

(3) When the evaluation is complete, the top three responsive bidders shall be ranked sequentially based on a determination of value provided.

(4) The award of the contract shall be made to the responsible bidder whose proposal is determined by the transportation entity to have
 offered the best value to the public.

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the transportation entity shall publicly announce its award, identifying the contractor to whom the award is made, along with a written decision supporting its contract award and stating the basis of the award. The notice of award shall also include the transportation entity’s second- and third-ranked design-build entities.

(6) The written decision supporting the transportation entity’s contract award, described in paragraph (5), and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 355.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6825.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the transportation entity, and issued by a California admitted surety. In no case shall the amount of the payment bond be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   (AB 401)   Effective January 1, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6826.

(a) The transportation entity, in each design-build request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that must be included in the design-build entity statement of qualifications and proposal. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the proposal shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 of Division 2.

(b) In awarding subcontracts not listed in the request for proposals, the design-build entity shall do all of the following:

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the transportation entity.

(2) Provide a fixed date and time on which the subcontracted work will be awarded.

(3) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(4) Provide that the subcontracted construction work shall be awarded either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder.
 For construction work awarded on a best value basis, the design-build entity shall evaluate all bids utilizing the factors described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 6824, and shall award the contract to the bidder determined by the design-build entity to have offered the best value.

(c) Subcontractors awarded subcontracts under this chapter shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 of Division 2.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   (AB 401)   Effective January 1, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6826.5.

The department shall submit a report to the transportation and fiscal committees of the Legislature on or before January 1, 2033, on its experience with use of the design-build method of procurement pursuant to this chapter, in terms of the relative costs and value of, and time to complete, projects that used the design-build method of procurement.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 212, Sec. 1.   (AB 1499)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6827.

Nothing in this chapter affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   (AB 401)   Effective January 1, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6828.

The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter or its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   (AB 401)   Effective January 1, 2014.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 6829.)
-------------------------------------------

6829.

(a) This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2034, and as of that date is repealed.

(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), if any provision or application of Section 91.2 of the Streets and Highways Code is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this chapter shall be repealed one year from the date in which the department
 posts on its internet website that Section 91.2 of the Streets and Highways Code has been held invalid.

(c) The repeal of this chapter shall not affect an executed design-build contract or cooperative agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter prior to the date of its repeal, regardless of the stage of the project at the time of repeal.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 212, Sec. 2.   (AB 1499)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed conditionally on or before January 1, 2034, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Chapter 6.5, commencing with Section 6820.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6.6. Alternative Project Delivery Program: Construction Manager/General Contractor Authority [6950. - 6958.]

6950.

The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(a) The alternative public works project delivery methods authorized under this chapter should be evaluated for the purposes of exploring whether the potential exists for reduced project costs, expedited project completion, or design features that are not achievable through the traditional project delivery methods.

(b) The design sequencing and Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery methods rely on existing design-bid-build and design-build procurement methods respectively and have been successfully used by both public and private sector entities in
 California and other states for over a decade on projects that require a quick startup as they allow construction to begin before the design plans are complete for the entire project.

(c) Both methods also have the benefit of allowing for earlier collaboration between the project owner and construction contractor.

(d) This chapter shall not be deemed to provide a preference for these project delivery methods over other delivery methodologies.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6951.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Alternative project delivery method” means either Construction Manager/General Contractor method or design sequencing.

(b) “Construction Manager/General Contractor method” or “CMGC” means a project delivery method using a best value procurement process in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and construction services during the construction phase of the project. The execution of the design and the construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(c) “Construction manager” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting and engineering services as needed pursuant to a CMGC contract.

(d) “Design sequencing” means a method of project delivery
 that enables the sequencing of design activities to permit each construction phase to commence when the design for that phase is complete, instead of requiring design for the entire project to be completed before commencing construction.

(e) “Department” means the Department of Transportation as established under Part 5 (commencing with Section 14000) of Division 3 of the Government Code.

(f) “San Diego Association of Governments” means the consolidated agency created pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 132350) of Division 12.7 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6952.

(a) Subject to the limitations of this chapter, the San Diego Association of Governments may utilize the alternative project delivery methods for public transit projects within the jurisdiction of the San Diego Association of Governments.

(b) The San Diego Association of Governments may enter into an alternative project delivery method contract pursuant to this chapter if, after evaluation of the traditional design-bid-build process of construction and of the alternative project delivery method in a public meeting, the San Diego Association of Governments makes a written finding that use of the alternative project delivery method on the specific project under
 consideration will accomplish one or more of the following objectives: reduce project costs, expedite the project’s completion, or provide features not achievable through the design-bid-build method. This finding must be made prior to the San Diego Association of Governments entering into an alternative project delivery method contract. In the alternative project delivery method proposal, the written findings shall be included as part of any application for state funds pursuant to this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6953.

Any public works project that is contracted for pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the requirements of Section 1771.4 of the Labor Code.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 28, Sec. 77.   (SB 854)   Effective June 20, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

6954.

(a) If a contract for CMGC services is entered into pursuant to this chapter and includes preconstruction services by the construction manager, the San Diego Association of Governments shall enter into a written contract with the construction manager for preconstruction services, under which the San Diego Association of Governments shall pay the construction manager a fee for preconstruction services in an amount agreed upon by the San Diego Association of Governments and the construction manager. The preconstruction services contract may include fees for services to be performed during the contract period; provided, however, the San Diego Association of Governments shall not request or obtain a fixed price or a guaranteed
 maximum price for the construction contract from the construction manager or enter into a construction contract with the construction manager until after the San Diego Association of Governments has entered into a services contract. A preconstruction services contract shall provide for the subsequent negotiation for construction of all or any discrete phase or phases of the project and shall provide for the San Diego Association of Governments to own the design plans and other preconstruction services work product.

(b) A contract for construction services will be awarded after the plans have been sufficiently developed and either a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price has been successfully negotiated. In the event that a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price is not negotiated, the San Diego Association of Governments may award
 the contract for construction services utilizing any other procurement method authorized by law.

(c) The construction manager shall perform not less than 30 percent of the work covered by the fixed price or guaranteed maximum price agreement reached. Work that is not performed directly by the construction manager shall be bid to subcontractors pursuant to Section 6955.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6955.

All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded the protections contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100).

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6956.

Nothing in this chapter affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6957.

(a) Upon completion of a project using an alternative project delivery method, the San Diego Association of Governments shall prepare a progress report to its governing body. The progress report shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following information:

(1) A description of the project.

(2) The entity that was awarded the project.

(3) The estimated and
 actual costs of the project.

(4) The estimated and actual schedule for project completion.

(5) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, proposal, or award of the project, including, but not limited to, the resolution of the protests.

(6) An assessment of the prequalification process and criteria utilized under this chapter if the CMGC procurement method is used.

(7) A description of the method used to evaluate the bid or proposal, including the weighting of each factor and an assessment of the impact of this requirement on a project.

(8) A description
 of any challenges or unexpected problems that arose during the construction of the project and a description of the solutions that were considered and ultimately implemented to address those challenges and problems.

(9) Recommendations to improve the alternative project delivery methods authorized under this chapter.

(b) The progress report shall be made available on the San Diego Association of Governments’ Internet Web site.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

6958.

(a) The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter or its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.

(b) Contracts awarded pursuant to this section shall be valid until the project is completed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 767, Sec. 1.   (SB 1549)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6.7. Construction Manager/General Contractor Method: Regional Projects on Expressways [6970. - 6974.]

6970.

(a) This chapter provides for an alternative procurement procedure for certain transportation projects performed by a regional transportation agency.

(b) The Construction Manager/General Contractor method allows the regional transportation agency to engage a construction manager during the design process to provide input on the design. During the design phase, the construction manager provides advice including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the agency to design a more constructible project.

(c) The Legislature finds and declares that utilizing a Construction Manager/General
 Contractor method requires a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of each participant in the process. The Legislature also finds and declares that cost-effective benefits are achieved by shifting the liability and risk for cost containment and project schedule to the construction manager and by permitting the coherent phasing of projects into discrete contract increments.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 413, Sec. 1.   (AB 1171)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

6971.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the County of Riverside should be considered a transportation planning agency for the purposes of this chapter in order to effectuate the construction of the railroad grade separations and bridge rehabilitations and replacements specified in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) using Construction Manager/General Contractor authority. The passage of the Road Repair and Accountability Act of 2017 (Chapter 5 of the Statutes of 2017) provides additional transportation revenue to help close the significant funding shortfalls and address the substantial backlog of infrastructure projects that are in need of repair. The geography, topography, and location of these railroad grade
 separations and bridge rehabilitations and replacements projects present many potential complex challenges, and the Construction Manager/General Contractor method could reduce delays and ensure that those challenges are fully understood at the outset of construction.

(b) For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Construction manager” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is a licensed contractor pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and that is able to
 provide, or that contracts with entities that are able to provide,
 appropriately licensed contracting or engineering services, or both appropriately licensed contracting and engineering services, as needed pursuant to a Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract.

(2) “Construction Manager/General Contractor method” means a project delivery method in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and construction services during the construction phase of the project. The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the
 contract for preconstruction services, or at a later time. The execution of the design and the construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(3) “Preconstruction services” means advice during the design phase, including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the regional transportation agency to design a more constructible project.

(4) “Project” means any of the following:

(A) The construction of an expressway that is not on the state highway system.

(B) The construction of the following bridges that are not on the state highway system:

(i) Yerba Buena Island (YBI) West Side Bridges Seismic Retrofit Project.

(ii) Yankee Jims Road Bridge Project in the County of Placer (Replacement/Rehabilitation).

(C) The construction of railroad grade separations and bridge rehabilitations and replacements in the County of Riverside, as specified in Item 2660-110-0042 of Section 2.00 of the Budget Act of 2016, as amended by Chapter 7 of the Statutes of 2017.

(D) The construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, or improvement of the Golden Gate Bridge, as defined in Section 27502 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(E) A Metrolink commuter rail project.

(F) Any transportation project that is not on the state highway system.

(5) “Regional transportation agency” means any of the following:

(A) A transportation planning agency described in Section 29532 or 29532.1 of the Government Code.

(B) A county transportation commission established under Section 130050, 130050.1, or 130050.2 of the Public Utilities Code.

(C) Any other local or regional transportation entity that is designated by statute as a regional transportation agency.

(D) A joint exercise of powers authority established pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of
 Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code, with the consent of a transportation planning agency or a county transportation commission for the jurisdiction in which the transportation project will be developed.

(E) A local transportation authority created or designated pursuant to Division 12.5 (commencing with Section 131000) or Division 19 (commencing with Section 180000) of the Public Utilities Code.

(F) The Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority established pursuant to Part 12 (commencing with Section 100000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(G) The County of Placer.

(H) The County of Riverside.

(I) The Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District established pursuant to Chapter 18 (commencing with Section 27500) of Part 3 of Division 16 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(c) This section does not extend any other authority to the County of Riverside or the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District as a transportation planning agency under any other law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 289, Sec. 2.   (AB 1475)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

6972.

(a) A regional transportation agency may utilize the Construction Manager/General Contractor method of procurement to design and construct projects pursuant to this section.

(b) A regional transportation agency may enter into a Construction Manager/General Contractor contract pursuant to this chapter after evaluation of the traditional design-bid-build method of construction and of the Construction Manager/General Contractor method and the board of the regional transportation agency affirmatively adopts the procurement strategy in a public meeting.

(c) The entity responsible for the maintenance of the local streets and roads within the jurisdiction of the
 expressway shall be responsible for the maintenance of the expressway.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2016, Ch. 753, Sec. 3.   (AB 2374)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

6973.

Construction Manager/General Contractor method projects authorized pursuant to Section 6972 shall be governed by the same process, procedures, and requirements as set forth in Section 6703, subdivision (a) of Section 6704, and Sections 6705 to 6708, inclusive, except that any reference to “department” shall mean the regional transportation agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 413, Sec. 1.   (AB 1171)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

6974.

(a) Upon completion of a project using the Construction Manager/General Contractor method, the regional transportation agency shall prepare a progress report to its governing body. The progress report shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following information:

(1) A description of the project.

(2) The name of the entity that was awarded the project.

(3) The estimated and actual costs of the project.

(4) The estimated and actual schedule for project completion.

(5) A
 description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, proposal, or award of the project, including, but not limited to, the resolution of the protests.

(6) An assessment of the prequalification process and criteria required by this chapter.

(7) A description of the method used to evaluate the bid or proposal, including the weighting of each factor and an assessment of the impact of this requirement on a project.

(8) A description of any challenges or unexpected problems that arose during the construction of the project and a description of the solutions that were considered and ultimately implemented to address those challenges and problems.

(9) Recommendations to improve the Construction Manager/General Contractor method
 authorized by this chapter.

(b) The progress report shall be made available on the regional transportation agency’s Internet Web site.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 413, Sec. 1.   (AB 1171)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6.8. High Road Jobs in Transportation-Related Public Contracts and Grants Pilot Program [6980. - 6986.]

6980.

This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the High Road Jobs in Transportation-Related Public Contracts and Grants Pilot Program.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, pursuant to Section 6986.)
-------------------------------------------

6981.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(1) In a time of uncertainty with so many Americans out of work, employment stability and equity are a primary concern.

(2) Spending on green investments creates more jobs per dollar than other infrastructure investments and these jobs are accessible and well paying. Every one million dollars ($1,000,000) in spending on renewable energy creates 7.5 full-time jobs.

(3) Historically vulnerable groups have been disproportionately impacted by economic downturns. For example, for every one percentage
 point increase in the overall unemployment rate, there is a 1.8-percent increase in African American unemployment.

(4) It is essential that the state, in cooperation with the federal government, use all practical and commercially feasible means to promote the prompt and efficient development of energy sources that are renewable or that more efficiently use and conserve scarce energy resources.

(5) It is in the public interest to do all of the following:

(A) Prioritize reversing factors that have resulted in disproportionate health impacts and economic suffering due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic among California’s low-income communities, communities of color, and immigrant communities that have historically faced
 underinvestment and discriminatory policies.

(B) Promote sustainable and renewable energy sources, implement measures that increase efficient energy use, advance transportation technologies that reduce the degradation of the environment, lessen the state’s dependence of fossil fuels, and protect the health, welfare, and safety of the people of this state.

(C) Spend resources to avoid recreating historical patterns of injustice by allocating resources in a manner that will create a just transition to a green, regenerative economy, founded on climate, racial, and economic justice, that puts an end to extreme inequality and systemic racial injustice, and ensures all Californians have a clean and safe environment in which to live, work, and play.

(D) Support a just recovery where workers from all sectors who have lost wages or jobs as a direct result of the pandemic will be prioritized for new employment opportunities that guarantee family-sustaining incomes, pensions, benefit training, retraining, and early retirement assistance.

(E) Require recovery spending to include a mandate for a robust, fully funded public sector that includes significant investments in job creation and community development with a particular focus on a just transition for affected workers.

(F) Expend resources in a broadly inclusive economic and democratic process that ensures robust, accessible opportunities for all Californians to determine the future of our government and economy.

(G) Allocate state funds to programs, businesses, organizations, agencies, and institutions that provide the greatest opportunities for good green jobs, strong labor provisions, and climate-based solutions in a manner that is consistent with the urgency of the climate crisis and the need to make rapid and sustained reductions
 in greenhouse gases and statewide emissions reduction targets and recommendations from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

(H) Ensure that recovery funds reach communities most impacted by the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and prioritize high road employers, as identified by the Labor and Workforce Development Agency, to enhance labor standards, workers’ rights, career pathways, and community benefits.

(I) Restore frontline communities and rapidly accelerate achievements in environmental justice and climate goals, including, but not limited to, climate, environmental, and biodiversity protection and stimulating growth.

(b) It is therefore the intent of the Legislature to support the creation
 of equitable high-quality transportation and related manufacturing and infrastructure jobs in California through the enactment and implementation of this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, pursuant to Section 6986.)
-------------------------------------------

6982.

Unless the context requires otherwise, for the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(a) (1) “Bidder” means a private entity that applies, bids, or seeks qualification for a covered public contract. “Bidder” may be more than a single entity.

(2) “Bidder” shall not include a firm, as defined in Section 4525 of the Government Code.

(b) “Contractor” means a private entity that has been awarded a covered public contract. 

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), “covered public contract” means, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, a public contract awarded by a relevant public agency for the acquisition of zero-emission transit vehicles or electric vehicle supply equipment valued at ten million dollars ($10,000,000) or more.

(2) (A) “Covered public contract” does not mean contracts for the construction or design of infrastructure, including, but not limited to, roads, bridges, or highways.

(B) “Covered public contract” does not mean a local agreement approved by the Labor and Workforce Development Agency that creates high road jobs.

(C) “Covered public contract” does not mean a contract relating to architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, environmental services, land surveying, or
 construction project management.

(D) “Covered public contract” does not include any of the following:

(i) A contract awarded before January 1, 2023.

(ii) A contract awarded based on a solicitation issued before January 1, 2023.

(iii) A grant or contract related to a grant award announced pursuant to a call for projects that occurred before January 1, 2023.

(d) “High road job standards” means a set of contract terms developed pursuant to Section
 6983 that is a material part of the final contract between the bidder and the relevant public agency. Noncompliance with these commitments would violate the terms of the covered public contract.

(e) “Relevant public agency” means the Department of General Services or the Department of
 Transportation.

(f) “Subcontractor” means a private entity performing a portion of the work of the covered public contract through a subcontract or subgrant.

(g) “Zero-emission transit vehicle” means a vehicle, including, but not limited to, one operated on rails or tracks, which is used for public transportation service and which carries more than 20 persons, including the driver, that produces no emissions of criteria pollutants, toxic air contaminants, and greenhouse gases
 when stationary or operating.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, pursuant to Section 6986.)
-------------------------------------------

6983.

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature that a relevant public agency maximize economic cobenefits by conditioning eligibility to be awarded a covered public contract on a commitment to comply with the labor standards established in this section.

(b) A covered public contract shall incorporate high road job standards designed to achieve the following goals:

(1) Support the creation and retention of quality, nontemporary and full-time jobs that provide high wages, including benefits and access to training.

(2) Support the hiring of displaced workers
 and individuals facing barriers to employment.

(3) Encourage the development of the state’s long-term, climate-sustainable transportation and related infrastructure and manufacturing sectors.

(4) Protect public health by supporting the adoption of specific protections for worker health and safety.

(c) At a minimum, the high road jobs standards shall warrant that the contractor, and any subcontractors that it may use to fulfill the covered public contract, shall satisfy the following requirements:

(1) Individuals performing work to fulfill the covered public contract shall not be misclassified as independent contractors.

(2) The contractor and any subcontractors performing work to fulfill the covered public contract shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws pertaining to paid sick leave, including any antiretaliation provisions contained in those laws.

(3) The contractor and any subcontractors performing work to fulfill the covered public contract shall comply with all applicable safety and health laws and regulations, and shall comply with the employee protections set forth in Sections 6310 and 6311 of the Labor Code.

(4) The contractor shall warrant that it complies, and will continue to comply, with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336; 42 U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq.) and all
 regulations thereunder.

(d) A relevant public agency may incorporate additional high road factors, as defined in subdivision (r) of Section 14005 of the Unemployment Insurance Code, into its scoring criteria for covered public contracts, including, but not limited to, a consideration
 of job creation, wages, and benefits.

(e) The Department of General Services, in consultation with the Labor and Workforce Development Agency and the Department of Transportation, shall develop and publish policies, procedures, and requirements applicable to covered public contracts in the State Contracting Manual for the purpose of implementing this chapter. The exemption established in Section 14615.1 of the Government Code shall apply to these policies, procedures, and requirements. 

(f) The programs created pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to solicitations or covered public contracts issued before January 1, 2023.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, pursuant to Section 6986.)
-------------------------------------------

6984.

(a) Beginning 12 months after an entity is awarded a covered public contract, the contractor shall annually submit information that is necessary to demonstrate its compliance with the requirements, as specified in Sections 6983 and 6985, to the relevant public agency.

(b) Before receiving any final
 payment on a covered public contract, a contractor shall submit a final report to the relevant public agency that demonstrates its compliance with the requirements, as specified in Sections 6983 and 6985, for the duration of the covered public contract.

(c) If a contractor fails to comply with the reporting requirements specified in subdivision (a), for each missed report the relevant public agency shall withhold ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in payment to the contractor, or the full payment to the contractor if the amount due is less than ten thousand
 dollars ($10,000), until the contractor takes steps to cure the defect, pursuant to subdivision (e).

(d) If a contractor fails to comply with the final reporting requirements specified in subdivision (b), the relevant public agency shall withhold ten thousand dollars ($10,000) from the final payment, or the full final payment, if the amount due is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000), until the contractor takes steps to cure the defect, pursuant to subdivision (e).

(e) A contractor that fails to comply with the reporting requirements established in subdivision (a) or (b) shall, after notice, be allowed to cure the defect. Notwithstanding any other law, if, after at least 15 calendar days, but not more than 30 calendar days from the date of notice, the contractor refuses to comply
 with the reporting requirements, the relevant public agency shall permanently deduct ten thousand dollars ($10,000) from the final payment, or the full payment if the amount due is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(f) For covered public contracts awarded pursuant to a master agreement or master contract agreement, the Department of General Services may prescribe additional or alternative mechanisms for enforcing the reporting requirements described in subdivisions (a) and (b).

(g) This section does not limit the availability of standard breach of contract remedies if a contractor fails to comply with the requirements specified in Sections 6983 and 6985, including, but not limited to, termination of the covered
 contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, pursuant to Section 6986.)
-------------------------------------------

6985.

(a) The Legislature declares all of the following:

(1) California will experience an increased prevalence of severe wildfires, heat, drought, and rising sea levels in the coming years as a result of climate change.

(2) The effects of climate change have already cost the state billions of dollars and will only continue to increase if we do not take immediate and decisive action to cut emissions.
 To name a few, these costs include all of the following:

(A) In 2018, California wildfire damages were estimated to total one hundred forty-eight billion five hundred million dollars ($148,500,000,000).

(B) The 2021 drought directly cost the California agriculture sector about one billion one hundred million dollars ($1,100,000,000) and nearly 8,750 full- and part-time jobs.

(C) The sea level along California's coasts is projected to rise by as much as 20 to 55 inches by the end of the century. A 55-inch sea level rise could put nearly half a million people at risk of flooding by 2100, and threaten one hundred billion dollars ($100,000,000,000) in costs to property and infrastructure, including roadways, buildings, hazardous waste sites, power plants, parks, and tourist destinations.

(3) The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has found global emissions must be reduced by 43 percent by 2030 in order to limit global warming to around 1.5 degrees Celsius.

(4) The transportation sector in California accounts for 41 percent of the state’s total carbon emissions.

(5) Recognizing the extreme financial threat climate change poses to the economy of California, the state has a financial interest in rolling out zero-emission transit vehicles as quickly and expeditiously as possible.

(b) To protect the state’s proprietary and economic interests in performing the covered public contract without interruption due to the economic effects of a labor dispute, the contractor and any subcontractors performing work to fulfill the covered public contract, shall enter into a labor peace agreement with any organization of any kind in which its employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or conditions of work and which requests a labor peace agreement.

(1) The labor peace agreement shall include a binding and enforceable provision prohibiting the organization and its members from engaging in picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, or any other economic interference for the duration of the
 labor peace agreement, which shall include the entire term of the covered public contract.

(2) This subdivision shall not be construed as requiring a contractor or any subcontractor to change terms and conditions of employment for its employees, recognize a labor organization as the bargaining representative for its employees, adopt any particular
 recognition process, or enter into a collective bargaining agreement with a labor organization.

(3) This subdivision does not abridge the rights, privileges, and benefits afforded by federal law, as applicable, including, but not limited to, Section 5333 of Title 49 of the United States Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, pursuant to Section 6986.)
-------------------------------------------

6986.

This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2028, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 875, Sec. 1.   (SB 674)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Chapter 6.8, commencing with Section 6980.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6.9. Embedding Workforce Standards in Procurement and Contracting [6990. - 6990.1.]

6990.

It is the intent of the Legislature, in enacting this chapter, to develop procurement models in alignment with initiatives to enhance the state’s training and access pipeline for quality jobs and the application of community benefits on infrastructure and manufacturing investments funded by the federal Infrastructure and Investment Jobs Act, the Inflation Reduction Act, and the CHIPS and Science Act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 61, Sec. 3.   (SB 150)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

6990.1.

(a) The Labor and Workforce Development Agency, the Government Operations Agency, and the Transportation Agency shall do all of the following:

(1) Convene relevant stakeholders to provide input on recommendations to establish terms to be included as a material part of a contract, including measurable results to ensure that investments maximize benefits to marginalized and disadvantaged communities.

(2) Meet with those stakeholders no less than three times during the process of developing recommendations described in paragraph (1).

(3) Consult with the Civil Rights Department, other relevant state agencies, and a
 research or academic institution for the University of California for purposes of developing recommendations described in paragraph (1).

(b) The recommendations described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) shall be provided to the Governor and the Legislature by March 30, 2024. The recommendations shall also be presented to the California Workforce Development Board in a regularly scheduled public meeting.

(c) For purposes of this section, relevant stakeholders shall include representatives from local public agencies, labor organizations that represent workers in manufacturing, business organizations, nonprofit organizations that represent women in the construction industry, organizations representing the formerly incarcerated, and organizations that represent populations historically marginalized in the California economy.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 61, Sec. 3.   (SB 150)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 7. Contract Clauses [7100. - 7203.]

7100.

Provisions in public works contracts with public entities which provide that acceptance of a payment otherwise due a contractor is a waiver of all claims against the public entity arising out of the work performed under the contract or which condition the right to payment upon submission of a release by the contractor of all claims against the public entity arising out of performance of the public work are against public policy and null and void. This section shall not prohibit a public entity from placing in a public works contract and enforcing a contract provision which provides that payment of undisputed contract amounts is contingent upon the contractor
 furnishing the public entity with a release of all claims against the public entity arising by virtue of the public works contract related to those amounts. Disputed contract claims in stated amounts may be specifically excluded by the contractor from the operation of the release.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 1120, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

7101.

The state or any other public entity in any public works contract awarded to the lowest bidder, may provide for the payment of extra compensation to the contractor for the cost reduction changes in the plans and specifications for the project made pursuant to a proposal submitted by the contractor. The extra compensation to the contractor shall be 50 percent of the net savings in construction costs as determined by the public entity. For projects under the supervision of the Department of Transportation or local or regional transportation entities, the extra
 compensation to the contractor shall be 60 percent of the net savings, if the cost reduction changes significantly reduce or avoid traffic congestion during construction of the project, in the opinion of the public entity. The contractor may not be required to perform the changes contained in an eligible change proposal submitted in compliance with the provisions of the contract unless the proposal was accepted by the public entity.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2001, Ch. 166, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------

7102.

Contract provisions in construction contracts of public agencies and subcontracts thereunder which limit the contractee’s liability to an extension of time for delay for which the contractee is responsible and which delay is unreasonable under the circumstances involved, and not within the contemplation of the parties, shall not be construed to preclude the recovery of damages by the contractor or subcontractor.

No public agency may require the waiver, alteration, or limitation of the applicability of this section. Any such waiver, alteration, or limitation is void. This section shall not be construed to void any
 provision in a construction contract which requires notice of delays, provides for arbitration or other procedure for settlement, or provides for liquidated damages.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1987, Ch. 98, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

7103.

(a) (1) Every original contractor that is awarded a contract by a state entity, as defined in subdivision (d), involving an expenditure in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) for any public work shall, before entering upon the performance of the work, file a payment bond with and approved by the officer or state entity that awarded the contract. The bond shall be in a sum not less than 100 percent of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract.

(2) The state entity shall state in its call for bids for any contract that a payment bond is required in the case of such an expenditure.

(b) A payment bond filed and approved in accordance with
 this section shall be sufficient to enter upon the performance of work under a duly authorized contract that supplements the contract for which the payment bond was filed if the requirement of a new bond is waived by the state entity.

(c) For purposes of this section, providers of architectural, engineering, and land surveying services pursuant to a contract with a state entity for a public work shall not be deemed an original contractor and shall not be required to post or file the payment bond required in subdivisions (a) and (b).

(d) For purposes of this section, “state entity” means every state office, department, division, bureau, board, or commission, but does not include the Legislature, the courts, any agency in the judicial branch of government, or the University of California. All other public entities shall be governed by Section 9550 of the Civil Code.

(e) For purposes of this section, “public work” includes the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any state structure, building, road, or other state improvement of any kind.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 44.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

7103.5.

(a) As used in this section: 

(1) “Public works contract” means a contract awarded through competitive bids by the state or any of its political subdivisions or public agencies, on whose behalf the Attorney General may bring an action pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 16750 of the Business and Professions Code, for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any structure, building, road, or other improvement of any kind. 

(2) “Awarding body” means the state or the subdivision
 or agency awarding a public works contract. 

(b) In entering into a public works contract or a subcontract to supply goods, services, or materials pursuant to a public works contract, the contractor or subcontractor offers and agrees to assign to the awarding body all rights, title, and interest in and to all causes of action it may have under Section 4 of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 15) or under the Cartwright Act (Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 16700) of Part 2 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code), arising from purchases of goods, services, or materials pursuant to the public works contract or the subcontract. This assignment shall be made and become effective at the time the awarding body tenders final payment to the contractor, without further acknowledgment by the parties. 

(c) Subdivision (b) shall be included in full in the specifications for the
 public works contract or in the general provisions incorporated therein and shall be included in full in the public works contract or in the general provisions incorporated therein.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 7103 (as added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 694) by Stats. 1991, Ch. 1091, Sec. 121.)
-------------------------------------------

7104.

Any public works contract of a local public entity which involves digging trenches or other excavations that extend deeper than four feet below the surface shall contain a clause which provides the following:

(a) That the contractor shall promptly, and before the following conditions are disturbed, notify the local public entity, in writing, of any:

(1) Material that the contractor believes may be material that is hazardous waste, as
 defined in Section 25117 of the Health and Safety Code, that is required to be removed to a Class I, Class II, or Class III disposal site in accordance with provisions of existing law.

(2) Subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site differing from those indicated by information about the site made available to bidders prior to the deadline for submitting bids.

(3) Unknown physical conditions at the site of any unusual nature, different materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in work of the character provided for in the contract.

(b) That the local public entity shall promptly investigate the conditions, and if it finds that the conditions do materially so differ, or do involve hazardous waste, and cause a decrease or increase in the contractor’s cost of, or the time
 required for, performance of any part of the work shall issue a change order under the procedures described in the contract.

(c) That, in the event that a dispute arises between the local public entity and the contractor whether the conditions materially differ, or involve hazardous waste, or cause a decrease or increase in the contractor’s cost of, or time required for, performance of any part of the work, the contractor shall not be excused from any scheduled completion date provided for by the contract, but shall proceed with all work to be performed under the contract. The contractor shall retain any and all rights provided either by contract or by law which pertain to the resolution of disputes and protests between the contracting parties.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 183, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

7105.

(a) Construction contracts of public agencies shall not require the contractor to be responsible for the cost of repairing or restoring damage to the work, which damage is determined to have been proximately caused by an act of God, in excess of 5 percent of the contracted amount, provided, that the work damaged is built in accordance with accepted and applicable building standards and the plans and specifications of the awarding authority. However, contracts may include provisions for terminating the contract. The requirements of this section shall not be mandatory as to construction contracts financed by revenue bonds. This section
 shall not prohibit a public agency from requiring that a contractor obtain insurance to indemnify the public agency for any damage to the work caused by an act of God if the insurance premium is a separate bid item. If insurance is required, requests for bids issued by public agencies shall set forth the amount of the work to be covered and the contract resulting from the requests for bids shall require that the contractor furnish evidence of satisfactory insurance coverage to the public agency prior to execution of the contract.

(b) For the purposes of this section: 

(1) “Public agency” shall include the state, the Regents of the University of California, a city, county, district, public authority, public agency, municipal utility, and any other political subdivision or public corporation of the state. 

(2) “Acts of
 God” shall include only the following occurrences or conditions and effects: earthquakes in excess of a magnitude of 3.5 on the Richter Scale and tidal waves. 

(c) Public agencies may make changes in construction contracts for public improvements in the course of construction to bring the completed improvements into compliance with environmental requirements or standards established by state and federal statutes and regulations enacted after the contract has been awarded or entered into. The contractor shall be paid for the changes in accordance with the provisions of the contract governing payment for changes in the work or, if no provisions are set forth in the contract, payment shall be as agreed to by the parties. 

(d) (1) Where authority to contract is vested in any public agency, excluding the state, the authority shall include the power, by mutual
 consent of the contracting parties, to terminate, amend, or modify any contract within the scope of such authority. 

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to contracts entered into pursuant to any statute expressly requiring that contracts be let or awarded on the basis of competitive bids. Contracts of public agencies, excluding the state, required to be let or awarded on the basis of competitive bids pursuant to any statute may be terminated, amended, or modified only if the termination, amendment, or modification is so provided in the contract or is authorized under provision of law other than this subdivision. The compensation payable, if any, for amendments and modifications shall be determined as provided in the contract. The compensation payable, if any, in the event the contract is so terminated shall be determined as provided in the contract or applicable statutory provision providing for the termination. 

(3) Contracts of public agencies may include provisions for termination for environmental considerations at the discretion of the public agencies.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 7104 (as added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 694) by Stats. 1991, Ch. 1091, Sec. 122.)
-------------------------------------------

7106.

Every bid on every public works contract of a public entity shall include a declaration under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California, in the following form: “NONCOLLUSION DECLARATION TO BE EXECUTED BY
 BIDDER AND SUBMITTED WITH BID

The undersigned declares:

 I am
 the ____ of ____, the party making the foregoing bid.

 The bid is not made in the interest of, or on behalf of, any undisclosed person, partnership, company, association, organization, or corporation. The bid is genuine and not collusive or sham. The bidder has not directly or indirectly induced or solicited any other bidder to put in a false or sham bid. The bidder has not directly or indirectly colluded, conspired, connived, or agreed with any bidder or anyone else to put in a sham bid, or to refrain from bidding. The bidder has not in any manner, directly or indirectly, sought by agreement, communication, or conference with anyone to fix the bid price of the bidder or any other bidder, or to fix any overhead, profit, or cost element of the bid price, or of that of any other bidder. All statements contained in the bid are true. The bidder has not, directly or indirectly, submitted his or her bid price or any breakdown thereof, or the contents thereof, or divulged
 information or data relative thereto, to any corporation, partnership, company, association, organization, bid depository, or to any member or agent thereof, to effectuate a collusive or sham bid, and has not paid, and will not pay, any person or entity for such purpose.

Any person executing this declaration on behalf of a bidder that is a corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or any other entity, hereby represents that he or she has full power to execute, and does execute, this declaration on behalf of the bidder.

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing is true and correct and that this declaration is executed on ___[date], at ___[city], ___[state].”

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 432, Sec. 37.   (SB 944)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

7107.

(a) This section is applicable with respect to all contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1993, relating to the construction of any public work of improvement.

(b) The retention proceeds withheld from any payment by the public entity from the original contractor, or by the original contractor from any subcontractor, shall be subject to this section.

(c) Within 60 days after the date of completion of the work
 of improvement, the retention withheld by the public entity shall be released. In the event of a dispute between the public entity and the original contractor, the public entity may withhold from the final payment an amount not to exceed 150 percent of the disputed amount. For purposes of this subdivision, “completion” means any of the following:

(1) The occupation, beneficial use, and enjoyment of a work of improvement, excluding any operation only for testing, startup, or commissioning, by the public agency, or its agent, accompanied by cessation of labor on the work of improvement.

(2) The acceptance by the public agency, or its agent, of the work of improvement.

(3) After the commencement of a work of improvement, a cessation of labor on the work of improvement for a continuous period of 100 days or more, due to
 factors beyond the control of the contractor.

(4) After the commencement of a work of improvement, a cessation of labor on the work of improvement for a continuous period of 30 days or more, if the public agency files for record a notice of cessation or a notice of completion.

(d) Subject to subdivision (e), within seven days from the time that all or any portion of the retention proceeds are received by the original contractor, the original contractor shall pay each of its subcontractors from whom retention has been withheld, each subcontractor’s share of the retention received. However, if a retention payment received by the original contractor is specifically designated for a particular subcontractor, payment of the retention shall be made to the designated subcontractor, if the payment is consistent with the terms of the subcontract.

(e) The original contractor may withhold from a subcontractor its portion of the retention proceeds if a bona fide dispute exists between the subcontractor and the original contractor. The amount withheld from the retention payment shall not exceed 150 percent of the estimated value of the disputed amount.

(f) In the event that retention payments are not made within the time periods required by this section, the public entity or original contractor withholding the unpaid amounts shall be subject to a charge of 2 percent per month on the improperly withheld amount, in lieu of any interest otherwise due. Additionally, in any action for the collection of funds wrongfully withheld, the prevailing party shall be entitled to attorney’s fees and costs.

(g) If a state agency retains an amount greater than 125 percent of the
 estimated value of the work yet to be completed pursuant to Section 10261, the state agency shall distribute undisputed retention proceeds in accordance with subdivision (c). However, notwithstanding subdivision (c), if a state agency retains an amount equal to or less than 125 percent of the estimated value of the work yet to be completed, the state agency shall have 90 days in which to release undisputed retentions.

(h)Any attempted waiver of the provisions of this section shall be void as against the public policy of this state.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 857, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

7108.

Any contract of a public entity to provide train service shall require compliance with the personnel requirements of Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 6900) of Part 2 of Division 5 of the Labor Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 976, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

7109.

(a) For purposes of this section:

(1) “Antigraffiti technology” means landscaping, paint, or other covering resistant to graffiti, or other procedures to deter graffiti.

(2) “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any structural component of any building, structure, or other facility regardless of its content or nature and
 regardless of the nature of the material of the structural component.

(3) “Project” means the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any public structure, building, road, or other public improvement of any kind.

(b) If a public entity determines that a project may be vulnerable to graffiti and the public entity will be awarding a public works contract after January 1, 1996, for that project, it is the intent of the Legislature that the public entity may do one or more of the following:

(1) Include a provision in the public works contract that specifies requirements for antigraffiti technology in the plans and specifications for the project.

(2) Establish a method to finance a graffiti abatement program.

(3) Establish a program to deter graffiti.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 504, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

7110.

(a) It is the policy of this state that anyone who enters into a contract with a state agency shall recognize the importance of child and family support obligations and shall fully comply with all applicable state and federal laws relating to child and family support enforcement, including, but not limited to, disclosure of information and compliance with earnings assignment orders, as provided in Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 5200) of Part 5 of Division 9 of the Family Code.

(b) Every written contract in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) executed between a contractor and a state agency shall contain the following:

(1) An acknowledgment by the contractor of the policy of the state set forth in subdivision (a).

(2) An acknowledgment by the contractor that to the best of its knowledge it is fully complying with the earnings assignment orders of all employees and is providing the names of all new employees to the New Hire Registry maintained by the Employment Development Department.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 899, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

7200.

(a) (1) This section shall apply with respect to all contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1999, between a public entity and an original contractor, between an original contractor and a subcontractor, and between all subcontractors thereunder, relating to the construction of any public work of improvement.

(2) For purposes of this section, “public entity” means the state, including every state agency, office, department, division, bureau, board, or
 commission, a city, county, city and county, including chartered cities and chartered counties, district, special district, public authority, political subdivision, public corporation, or nonprofit transit corporation wholly owned by a public agency and formed to carry out the purposes of the public agency.

(b) In a contract between the original contractor and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld may not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the public entity and the original contractor.

(c) When a performance and payment bond is required in the solicitation for bids, subdivision (b) shall not apply to either of the following:

(1) The original contractor, if the subcontractor fails or refuses to
 provide a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, to the original contractor.

(2) The subcontractor, if a subcontractor thereunder fails or refuses to provide a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, to the subcontractor.

(d) No party identified in subdivision (b) shall require any other party to waive any provision of this section.

(e) In the event that the contractor elects to substitute securities in lieu of retentions, the contractor may withhold from his or her subcontractors, who have not elected to substitute securities in lieu of retentions, the amount of retentions that would have otherwise been withheld.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 857, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

7201.

(a) (1) This section shall apply with respect to all contracts entered into on or after January 1, 2012, between a public entity and an original contractor, between an original contractor and a subcontractor, and between all subcontractors thereunder, relating to the construction of any public work of improvement.

(2) Under no circumstances shall any provision of this section be construed to limit the ability of any public entity to withhold 150 percent of the value of any disputed amount of work from the final payment, as provided for in subdivision (c) of Section 7107. In the event of a good faith dispute, nothing in this section shall be construed to require a public entity to pay for work that is not approved or accepted in accordance with
 the proper plans or specifications.

(3) For purposes of this section, “public entity” means the state, including every state agency, office, department, division, bureau, board, or commission, the California State University, the University of California, a city, county, city and county, including charter cities and charter counties, district, special district, public authority, political subdivision, public corporation, or nonprofit transit corporation wholly owned by a public agency and formed to carry out the purposes of the public agency.

(b) (1) The retention proceeds withheld from any payment by a public entity from the original contractor, by the original contractor from any subcontractor, and by a subcontractor from any subcontractor thereunder shall not exceed 5 percent of the payment. In no event shall the total retention proceeds withheld exceed 5
 percent of the contract price. In a contract between the original contractor and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the public entity and the original contractor.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if the contractor provides written notice to the subcontractor, pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 4108, prior to, or at, the time that the bid is requested, that bonds shall be required, and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish to the contractor a performance and payment bond issued by an admitted surety insurer.

(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, the retention proceeds withheld from any payment by an awarding entity set forth in paragraphs (1) to (5),
 inclusive, of subdivision (a) of Section 10106, from the original contractor, by the original contractor from any subcontractor, and by a subcontractor from any subcontractor thereunder, may exceed 5 percent on specific projects where the director of the department has made a finding prior to the bid that the project is substantially complex and therefore requires a higher retention amount than 5 percent and the department includes in the bid documents details explaining the basis for the finding and the actual retention amount. In a contract between the original contractor and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the original contractor.

(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, the retention proceeds withheld from any payment by the
 awarding entity of a city, county, city and county, including charter cities and charter counties, district, special district, public authority, political subdivision, public corporation, or nonprofit transit corporation wholly owned by a public agency and formed to carry out the purposes of the public agency, from the original contractor, by the original contractor from any subcontractor, and by a subcontractor from any subcontractor thereunder, may exceed 5 percent on specific projects where the governing body of the public entity or designee, including, but not limited to, a general manager or other director of an appropriate department, has approved a finding, on a project by project basis, during a properly noticed and normally scheduled public hearing and prior to bid that the project is substantially complex and therefore requires a higher retention amount than 5 percent and the awarding entity includes in the bid documents details explaining the basis for the finding and the actual retention amount.
 In a contract between the original contractor and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the original contractor.

(5) Any finding by a public entity that a project is substantially complex shall include a description of the specific project and why it is a unique project that is not regularly, customarily, or routinely performed by the agency or licensed contractors.

(c) A party identified in subdivision (a) shall not require any other party to waive any provision of this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 121, Sec. 1.   (AB 2173)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

7202.

(a) The Department of Transportation is prohibited from withholding retention proceeds when making progress payments to a contractor for work performed on a transportation project.

(b) Nothing in this section shall alter, amend, or impair the rights, duties, and obligations of an original contractor, its subcontractors, and all subcontractors thereunder, relating to the construction of any public work of improvement as set forth in Section 7200.

(c) The
 Department of Transportation shall promptly notify the appropriate policy committees of the Legislature if the state’s best interests are compromised because retention was not withheld on a transportation project.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 842, Sec. 1.   (SB 197)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

7203.

(a) A public works contract entered into on or after January 1, 2016, that contains a clause that expressly requires a contractor to be responsible for delay damages is not enforceable unless the delay damages have been liquidated to a set amount and identified in the public works contract.

(b) “Delay damages” as used in this section, means damages incurred by the public agency for each day after the date on which the work was to be completed by the contractor pursuant to the public works contract. Delay damages shall not include damages incurred by a public agency after the filing of a notice of completion or, in the absence of a notice of completion, the acceptance
 by the public agency of the public work as complete. 

(c) “Public agency” shall include the state, the Regents of the University of California, a city, charter city, county, charter county, district, public authority, municipal utility, and any other political subdivision or public corporation of the state.

(d) This section shall not be construed to limit a right or remedy that the public agency has to enforce the express terms of the public works contract, except for a clause that expressly requires a contractor to be liable for delay damages.

(e) This section shall not be construed to preclude a public agency from including more than one clause for delay damages for specified portions of work when the delay damages have been liquidated
 to a set amount for each individual clause and identified in the public works contract.

(f) This section shall not apply to departments identified in Section 10106.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 434, Sec. 2.   (AB 552)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 9. Claims and Disputes [9201. - 9204.]

9201.

(a) A public entity shall have full authority to compromise or otherwise settle any claim relating to a contract at any time.

(b) The public entity shall include provisions in a public works contract for timely notification of the contractor of the receipt of any third-party claim, relating to the contract.

(c) The public entity shall be entitled to recover its reasonable costs incurred in providing the
 notification required by subdivision (b).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 315, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

9203.

(a) Payment on any contract with a local agency for the creation, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any public structure, building, road, or other improvement, of any kind which will exceed in cost a total of five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be made as the legislative body prescribes upon estimates approved by the legislative body, but progress payments shall not be made in excess of 95 percent of the percentage of actual work completed plus a like percentage of the value of material delivered on the ground or stored
 subject to, or under the control of, the local agency, and unused. The local agency shall withhold not less than 5 percent of the contract price until final completion and acceptance of the project. However, at any time after 50 percent of the work has been completed, if the legislative body finds that satisfactory progress is being made, it may make any of the remaining progress payments in full for actual work completed.

(b) Notwithstanding the dollar limit specified in subdivision (a), a county water authority shall be subject to a twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000) limit for purposes of subdivision (a).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 126, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

9204.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that it is in the best interests of the state and its citizens to ensure that all construction business performed on a public works project in the state that is complete and not in dispute is paid in full and in a timely manner.

(b) Notwithstanding any other law, including, but not limited to, Article 7.1 (commencing with Section 10240) of Chapter 1 of Part 2, Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 19100) of Part 2, and Article 1.5 (commencing with Section 20104) of Chapter 1 of Part 3, this section shall apply to any claim by a contractor in connection with a public works project.

(c) For
 purposes of this section:

(1) “Claim” means a separate demand by a contractor sent by registered mail or certified mail with return receipt requested, for one or more of the following:

(A) A time extension, including, without limitation, for relief from damages or penalties for delay assessed by a public entity under a contract for a public works project.

(B) Payment by the public entity of money or damages arising from work done by, or on behalf of, the contractor pursuant to the contract for a public works project and payment for which is not otherwise expressly provided or to which the claimant is not otherwise entitled.

(C) Payment of an amount that is
 disputed by the public entity.

(2) “Contractor” means any type of contractor within the meaning of Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code who has entered into a direct contract with a public entity for a public works project.

(3) (A) “Public entity” means, without limitation, except as provided in subparagraph (B), a state agency, department, office, division, bureau, board, or commission, the California State University, the University of California, a city, including a charter city, county, including a charter county, city and county, including a charter city and county, district, special district, public authority, political subdivision, public corporation, or nonprofit transit corporation wholly owned
 by a public agency and formed to carry out the purposes of the public agency.

(B) “Public entity” shall not include the following:

(i) The Department of Water Resources as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(ii) The Department of Transportation as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(iii) The Department of Parks and Recreation as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(iv) The Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation with respect to any project under its jurisdiction pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7000) of Title 7 of Part 3 of
 the Penal Code.

(v) The Military Department as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(vi) The Department of General Services as to all other projects.

(vii) The High-Speed Rail Authority.

(4) “Public works project” means the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any public structure, building, road, or other public improvement of any kind.

(5) “Subcontractor” means any type of contractor within the meaning of Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code who either is in direct contract with a contractor or
 is a lower tier subcontractor.

(d) (1) (A) Upon receipt of a claim pursuant to this section, the public entity to which the claim applies shall conduct a reasonable review of the claim and, within a period not to exceed 45 days, shall provide the claimant a written statement identifying what portion of the claim is disputed and what portion is undisputed. Upon receipt of a claim, a public entity and a contractor may, by mutual agreement, extend the time period provided in this subdivision.

(B) The claimant shall furnish reasonable documentation to support the claim.

(C) If the public entity needs approval from its governing body to provide the claimant a written statement
 identifying the disputed portion and the undisputed portion of the claim, and the governing body does not meet within the 45 days or within the mutually agreed to extension of time following receipt of a claim sent by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, the public entity shall have up to three days following the next duly publicly noticed meeting of the governing body after the 45-day period, or extension, expires to provide the claimant a written statement identifying the disputed portion and the undisputed portion.

(D) Any payment due on an undisputed portion of the claim shall be processed and made within 60 days after the public entity issues its written statement. If the public entity fails to issue a written statement, paragraph (3) shall apply.

(2) (A) If the claimant disputes the public entity’s written response, or if the public entity fails to respond to a claim issued pursuant to this section within the time prescribed, the claimant may demand in writing an informal conference to meet and confer for settlement of the issues in dispute. Upon receipt of a demand in writing sent by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, the public entity shall schedule a meet and confer conference within 30 days for settlement of the dispute.

(B) Within 10 business days following the conclusion of the meet and confer conference, if the claim or any portion of the claim remains in dispute, the public entity shall provide the claimant a written statement identifying the portion of the claim that remains in dispute and the portion that is undisputed.
 Any payment due on an undisputed portion of the claim shall be processed and made within 60 days after the public entity issues its written statement. Any disputed portion of the claim, as identified by the contractor in writing, shall be submitted to nonbinding mediation, with the public entity and the claimant sharing the associated costs equally. The public entity and claimant shall mutually agree to a mediator within 10 business days after the disputed portion of the claim has been identified in writing. If the parties cannot agree upon a mediator, each party shall select a mediator and those mediators shall select a qualified neutral third party to mediate with regard to the disputed portion of the claim. Each party shall bear the fees and costs charged by its respective mediator in connection with the selection of the neutral mediator. If mediation is unsuccessful, the parts of the claim
 remaining in dispute shall be subject to applicable procedures outside this section.

(C) For purposes of this section, mediation includes any nonbinding process, including, but not limited to, neutral evaluation or a dispute review board, in which an independent third party or board assists the parties in dispute resolution through negotiation or by issuance of an evaluation. Any mediation utilized shall conform to the timeframes in this section.

(D) Unless otherwise agreed to by the public entity and the contractor in writing, the mediation conducted pursuant to this section shall excuse any further obligation under Section 20104.4 to mediate after litigation has been commenced.

(E) This section does not preclude a public
 entity from requiring arbitration of disputes under private arbitration or the Public Works Contract Arbitration Program, if mediation under this section does not resolve the parties’ dispute.

(3) Failure by the public entity to respond to a claim from a contractor within the time periods described in this subdivision or to otherwise meet the time requirements of this section shall result in the claim being deemed rejected in its entirety. A claim that is denied by reason of the public entity’s failure to have responded to a claim, or its failure to otherwise meet the time requirements of this section, shall not constitute an adverse finding with regard to the merits of the claim or the responsibility or qualifications of the claimant.

(4) Amounts not paid in a timely manner as
 required by this section shall bear interest at 7 percent per annum.

(5) If a subcontractor or a lower tier subcontractor lacks legal standing to assert a claim against a public entity because privity of contract does not exist, the contractor may present to the public entity a claim on behalf of a subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor. A subcontractor may request in writing, either on their own behalf or on behalf of a lower tier subcontractor, that the contractor present a claim for work which was performed by the subcontractor or by a lower tier subcontractor on behalf of the subcontractor. The subcontractor requesting that the claim be presented
 to the public entity shall furnish reasonable documentation to support the claim. Within 45 days of receipt of this written request, the contractor shall notify the subcontractor in writing as to whether the contractor presented the claim to the public entity and, if the original contractor did not present the claim, provide the subcontractor with a statement of the reasons for not having done so.

(e) The text of this section or a summary of it shall be set forth in the plans or specifications for any public works project that may give rise to a claim under this section.

(f) A waiver of the rights granted by this section is void and contrary to public policy, provided, however, that (1) upon receipt of a claim, the parties may mutually agree to waive, in writing, mediation
 and proceed directly to the commencement of a civil action or binding arbitration, as applicable; and (2) a public entity may prescribe reasonable change order, claim, and dispute resolution procedures and requirements in addition to the provisions of this section, so long as the contractual provisions do not conflict with or otherwise impair the timeframes and procedures set forth in this section.

(g) This section applies to contracts entered into on or after January 1, 2017.

(h) Nothing in this section shall impose liability upon a public entity that makes loans or grants available through a competitive application process, for the failure of an awardee to meet its contractual obligations.

(i) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute that is enacted before January 1, 2027, deletes or extends that date.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 489, Sec. 1.   (AB 456)   Effective January 1, 2020.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------



PART 2. CONTRACTING BY STATE AGENCIES [10100. - 19150.]



  CHAPTER 1. State Contract Act [10100. - 10285.5.]



  ARTICLE 1. Scope of Chapter and General Provisions [10100. - 10111.2.]

10100.

This chapter may be cited as the State Contract Act.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 328, Sec. 184.   (SB 1330)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10101.

(a) Contracts for the purchase of supplies or materials, which are purchased pursuant to Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10290), are not subject to this chapter, even though the seller is required to perform some incidental work or service in connection with the delivery of the material or supplies.

(b) Contracts for which emergency work
 or remedial measures are required are not subject to this chapter if the work or remedial measures are necessary to immediately avert, alleviate, repair, or mitigate destruction of property caused by the accidental or unplanned release of toxic substances and are necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 328, Sec. 185.   (SB 1330)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10102.

Improvements on the property of the state on the waterfront of the City and County of San Francisco under the jurisdiction of the San Francisco Port Commission are not subject to this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 328, Sec. 186.   (SB 1330)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10103.

Work done directly by any public utility company pursuant to order of the Public Utilities Commission or other public authority is not subject to this chapter, whether or not done under public supervision or paid for in whole or part out of public funds.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 328, Sec. 187.   (SB 1330)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10103.5.

Work performed by prisoners pursuant to an order by the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation or by the California Correctional Training and Rehabilitation Authority is not subject to this chapter, provided that the total cost of a project for the construction of new, previously unoccupied prison facilities or additions to an existing facility shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) unless it is first approved by the State Public Works Board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 241, Sec. 64.   (SB 857)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

10104.

As used in this chapter, “mobilization” includes preparatory work and operations, including, but not limited to, those necessary for the movement of personnel, equipment, supplies and incidentals to the project site, for the establishment of all offices, buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project, and for all other work and operations which must be performed or costs incurred prior to beginning work on
 the various items on the project site.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 328, Sec. 189.   (SB 1330)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10105.

(a) As used in this chapter, “project” includes the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any state structure, building, road, or other state improvement of any kind that will exceed a total cost calculated pursuant to subdivision (b).

(b) The total cost limit for calendar year 2010 shall be two hundred fifty
 thousand dollars ($250,000), and at two year intervals thereafter, the total cost limit shall be adjusted upward or downward by the Director of Finance to reflect the percentage change in the annual California Construction Index as used by the Department of General Services. The amount shall be rounded off to the nearest one-thousand-dollar ($1,000) figure.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 328, Sec. 190.   (SB 1330)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10106.

For purposes of this chapter:

(a) “Department” means any of the following:

(1) The Department of Water Resources as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(2) The Department of Transportation as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(3) The Department of Parks and Recreation as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(4) The Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation with respect to any project under its
 jurisdiction pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7000) of Title 7 of Part 3 of the Penal Code.

(5) The Military Department as to any project under the jurisdiction of that department.

(6) The High-Speed Rail Authority as to any project under the jurisdiction of that authority.

(7) The Department of General Services as to all other projects.

(b) “Director” means the director of each department as defined in this section respectively or the executive director, also known as the chief executive officer, in the case of the High-Speed Rail Authority.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 790, Sec. 8.   (SB 1172)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

10107.

Whenever provision is made by law for any project that is not under the jurisdiction of the Department of Water Resources, the Department of Parks and Recreation, the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7000) of Title 7 of Part 3 of the Penal Code, the Department of Transportation, the High-Speed Rail Authority, or the Military Department, the project shall be under the sole charge and direct control of the Department of General Services.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 790, Sec. 9.   (SB 1172)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

10108.

Where the nature of the work in the opinion of the department is such that its services in connection therewith are not required, it may authorize the carrying out of the project directly by the state agency concerned therewith if the estimated cost does not exceed six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000), except that the six hundred thousand dollar ($600,000) limitation shall not apply to a project of a district agricultural
 association or a project of the State Lands Commission. Any capital outlay project with a total value that does not exceed six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000) may be budgeted as a minor capital outlay project. This limit shall be adjusted pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 10105.

If the estimated total cost of any construction project or work carried out under this section exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), the district or agency shall solicit bids in writing and shall award the work to the lowest responsible bidder or reject all bids. However, the director may authorize the district or agency to carry out work in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) under the provisions of this section by day labor if he or she deems that the award of a contract, the acceptance of bids, or the acceptance of further bids is not in the best interests of the state. In no event shall the amount of work performed by day labor under this section exceed
 the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) in the case of district agricultural association fair projects, or thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) in other cases.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 252, Sec. 3.   (AB 2181)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10108.5.

(a) When the nature of the work by departments, boards, commissions, or conservancies within the Resources Agency, in the opinion of the Department of General Services, is such that its services in connection therewith are not required, it may authorize the carrying out of the project directly by the department within the Resources Agency concerned therewith if the estimated cost does not exceed five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). This limit shall be adjusted pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 10105.

 (b) If the estimated total cost of any construction project or work carried out under this section exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection shall solicit bids in writing and shall award the work to the lowest responsible bidder or reject all bids. However, the Director of General Services may authorize the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection to carry out work in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) under this section by day labor if he or she deems that the award of a contract, the acceptance of bids, or the acceptance of further bids is not in the best interests of the state. However, in no event shall the amount of work performed by day labor under this section exceed the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). This limit shall be adjusted pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 10105.

(c) Notwithstanding the cost
 limitation of subdivision (a), the State Coastal Conservancy may, if authorized by the Department of General Services as described in subdivision (a), directly carry out a public works project involving habitat or wetlands restoration and related pedestrian or cycling access improvements, not including buildings or other nonaccess related structures on the following state-owned lands: Bel Marin Keys Unit V in Marin County, Eden Landing Ecological Reserve (a part of the South Bay Salt Pond Restoration Project) in Alameda County, Bair Island Ecological Reserve in San Mateo County, Napa Sonoma Marshes State Wildlife Area in Napa, Solano, and Sonoma Counties, Ballona Wetlands Ecological Reserve in Los Angeles County, Buena Vista Lagoon Ecological Reserve in San Diego County, Los Peñasquitos Marsh in Torrey Pines State Natural Reserve in San Diego County, and Tijuana Estuary State Park in San Diego County. In carrying out a public works project pursuant to this subdivision, the State Coastal Conservancy shall
 comply with the provisions of, and regulations adopted pursuant to, this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2008, Ch. 444, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.)
-------------------------------------------

10108.6.

Notwithstanding Section 10108 and subdivision (a) of Section 10108.5, the department, upon request from the state agency concerned, may authorize the carrying out of a project or a class of projects of any amount directly by a state agency if the department finds that the state agency concerned is capable of successfully undertaking a project or projects of that amount. For projects or a class of projects where the total project cost exceeds three million dollars ($3,000,000), the department shall seek approval from the Department of Finance prior to authorizing a state agency to carry out the project or class of projects pursuant to this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 997, Sec. 18.   (AB 179)   Effective September 30, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10108.7.

(a) The Department of Corrections shall provide in the general conditions under which bids will be received, that any person making a bid or offer to perform a contract shall, in his or her bid or offer, set forth the following information:

(1) The name and the location of the place of business of each subcontractor certified as a minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprise who will perform work or labor or render service to the prime contractor in connection with
 the performance of the contract and who will be used by the prime contractor to fulfill minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise participation goals.

(2) The portion of work that will be done by each subcontractor under paragraph (1). The prime contractor shall list only one subcontractor for each portion of work as is defined by the prime contractor in his or her bid or offer.

(b) The Subletting and Subcontracting Fair Practices Act (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 shall apply to the information required by subdivision (a) relating to subcontractors certified as minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprises.

(c) For purposes of this section, “subcontractor” and “prime contractor” shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Section 4113.

(d) As used in this section, “contract” does not include a contract negotiated pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1032, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

10108.8.

The Department of Corrections, where feasible, shall enter into two or more procurement contracts for the purchase and development of the Business Information System (BIS) Project. The BIS project shall be developed to allow integration with other relevant statewide financial and personnel systems.

(History: Added by Stats. 2004, Ch. 227, Sec. 91.   Effective August 16, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10109.

Any notice inviting bids on a project which specifies locations of possible materials, such as a borrow pit or gravel bed, for use in the proposed project which would be subject to Section 1602 of the Fish and Game Code shall include any conditions or modifications established pursuant to Section 1603.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 383, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

10110.

(a) Where the nature of the work is historic restoration for the state park system, as determined jointly by the director and the Director of Parks and Recreation, the department may authorize the carrying out of the project directly by the Department of Parks and Recreation.

 (b) If the estimated total cost of any construction project or work carried out under this section exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the Department of Parks and Recreation shall solicit bids in writing and award the work to the lowest responsible bidder or reject all bids. However, the director may authorize the Department of Parks and Recreation to carry out work in excess of fifty thousand dollars
 ($50,000) under the provisions of this section by day labor if the director determines, in consultation with the Director of Parks and Recreation, that the award of a contract, the acceptance of bids, or the acceptance of further bids is not in the best interests of the state. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall establish, by regulation, criteria to be considered by the Department of Parks and Recreation in requesting authorization from the director to perform all or part of a project by day labor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 573, Sec. 2.   (SB 204)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

10111.

Commencing January 1, 2007, the department shall make available a report on contracting activity containing the following information:

(a) A listing of consulting services contracts that the state has entered into during the previous fiscal year. The listing shall include the following:

(1) The name and identification number of each contractor.

(2) The type of bidding entered into, the number of bidders, whether the low bidder was accepted, and if the low bidder was not accepted, an explanation of why another contractor was selected.

(3) The amount of the contract price.

(4) Whether the contract was a noncompetitive bid contract, and why the contract was a noncompetitive bid contract.

(5) Justification for entering into each consulting services contract.

(6) The purpose of the contract and the potential beneficiaries.

(7) The date when the initial contract was signed, and the date when the work began and was completed.

(b) The report shall also include a separate listing of consultant contracts completed during that fiscal year, with the same information specified in subdivision (a).

(c) The information specified in subdivisions (a) and (b) shall also include a list of any contracts underway during that fiscal year on which a change was made regarding the following:

(1) The completion date of the contract.

(2) The amount of money to be received by the contractor, if it exceeds 3 percent of the original contract price.

(3) The purpose of the contract or duties of the contractor. A brief explanation shall be given if the change in purpose is significant.

(d) The level of participation, by agency, of disabled veteran business enterprises in statewide contracting and shall include dollar values of contract award for the following
 categories:

(1) Construction.

(2) Architectural, engineering, and other professional services.

(3) Procurement of materials, supplies, and equipment.

(4) Information technology procurements.

Additionally, the report shall include a statistical summary detailing each awarding department’s goal achievement and a statewide total of those goals.

(e) The level of participation by small business in state contracting including:

(1) Upon request, an up-to-date list of eligible small business bidders
 by general procurement and construction contract categories, noting company names and addresses and also noting which small businesses also qualify as microbusinesses.

(2) By general procurement and construction contract categories, statistics comparing the small business and microbusiness contract participation dollars to the total state contract participation dollars.

(3) By awarding department and general procurement and construction categories, statistics comparing the small business and microbusiness contract participation dollars to the total state contract participation dollars.

(4) Any recommendations for changes in
 statutes or state policies to improve opportunities for small businesses and microbusinesses.

(5) A statistical summary of small businesses and microbusinesses certified for state contracting by the number of employees at the business for each of the following categories: 0–5, 26–50, 51–75, and 76–100.

(6) To the extent feasible, beginning in the year 2008, the number of contracts awarded by the department in the categories specified in paragraph (5).

(7) The number of contracts and dollar amounts awarded annually pursuant to Section 14838.5 of the Government Code to small businesses, microbusinesses, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

(f) The level of participation of business enterprises, by race, ethnicity, and gender of the owner,
 in contracts to the extent that the information has been voluntarily reported to the department. In addition, the report shall contain the levels of participation of business enterprises, by race, ethnicity, and gender of the owner, and whether the business is a lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender owned business for the following categories of contracts, to the extent that the information has been voluntarily reported to the department:

(1) Construction.

(2) Purchases of materials, supplies, or equipment.

(3) Professional services.

(g) In the years 2011 and 2012, any errors reported to the department by an awarding agency as required by Sections 10302, 10344, and 12104.5, in the previous fiscal year.

(h) The amendments made to this section by the act adding this
 subdivision shall apply on and after January 1, 2013.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 861, Sec. 1.   (AB 1960)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

10111.2.

A department shall, upon request from a contractor plan room service, provide an electronic copy of a project’s contract documents at no charge to the contractor plan room.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 371, Sec. 1.   (AB 2036)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.1. Construction Manager/General Contractor Procurement Method for the Department of Water Resources [10112. - 10112.10.]

10112.

(a) This article provides for an alternative procurement procedure for certain projects performed by the Department of Water Resources.

(b) (1) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this article to authorize the Department of Water Resources to utilize the Construction Manager/General Contractor method as a cost-effective option for constructing water resources projects.

(2) The Construction Manager/General Contractor method allows the department to engage a construction manager during the design process to provide input on the design. During the design phase, the construction
 manager provides advice including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the department to design a more constructible project.

(c) The Legislature finds and declares that utilizing a Construction Manager/General Contractor method requires a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of each participant in the process. The Legislature also finds and declares that cost-effective benefits are achieved by shifting the liability and risk for cost containment and project schedule to the construction manager and by permitting the coherent phasing of projects into discrete contract increments.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.1.

As used in this article:

(a) “Construction manager” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is a licensed contractor pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting and engineering services as needed pursuant to a Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract. 

(b) “Construction Manager/General Contractor method” means a project delivery method in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and
 construction services during the construction phase of the project. The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the contract for preconstruction services, or at a later time. The execution of the design and the construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases. 

(c) “Department” means the Department of Water Resources.

(d) “Preconstruction services” means advice during the design phase including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the department to design a more constructible project. 

(e) “Project” means public works necessary for the construction, maintenance, or operation of elements of State Water Facilities, as defined in Section
 12934 of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.2.

(a) The Construction Manager/General Contractor method provided by this article may be used by the department, but is not limited to, when it is anticipated that the method will reduce project costs or expedite project completion in a manner that is not achievable through the design-bid-build method. Notwithstanding any other law, for projects utilizing the Construction Manager/General Contractor method provided by this article, the department shall advertise, award, and administer the Construction Manager/General Contractor contract.

(b) On all projects delivered by the department utilizing the Construction Manager/General Contractor method provided by this
 article, the department shall use department employees or consultants under contract with the department to perform all project design and engineering services related to design required for Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery consistent with Article XXII of the California Constitution. On all projects delivered by the department, the department shall use department employees or consultants under contract with the department to perform all construction inspection services required for Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery consistent with Article XXII of the California Constitution.

(c) The Construction Manager/General Contractor method referenced in this article shall not include the authority to perform construction inspection services for water resources projects authorized by this article,
 except as provided by Section 148 of the Water Code.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the department shall not utilize this method of procurement for the design or construction of through-Delta conveyance facilities of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.3.

Construction Manager/General Contractor method projects shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) The department shall establish a procedure for the evaluation and selection of a construction manager through a request for qualifications (RFQ). The RFQ shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(A) If the construction manager is a partnership, limited partnership, or other association, a list of all of the partners, general partners, or association members known at the time of the statement of qualifications submission who will participate in the Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract.

(B) Evidence that the members of the construction manager have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the construction of the project, as well as a financial statement that assures the department that the construction manager has the capacity to complete the project, construction expertise, and an acceptable safety record.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to construct the project, including information on the revocation or suspension of any license, registration, or credential.

(D) Evidence
 that establishes that the construction manager has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Any prior serious or willful violation of the California Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1973 (Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code), or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the construction manager, and information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and worker safety program.

(F) Information concerning any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project. Any instance in which a construction manager, its owners, officers,
 or managing employees submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(G) Any instance in which the construction manager, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, defaulted on a construction contract.

(H) Any violations of the Contractors’ State License Law (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), excluding alleged violations of federal or state law including the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or of the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (26 U.S.C. Sec. 3101, et seq.) withholding requirements settled against any member of the construction manager.

(I) Information concerning the bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the construction manager, including information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(J) Information concerning all settled adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the construction manager during the five years preceding submission of a bid pursuant to this section, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this period.

(K) In the case of a partnership or other association that is not a legal entity, a copy of the agreement creating the partnership or association
 and specifying that all partners or association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the contract.

(L) For the purposes of this paragraph, a construction manager’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if their experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and their average total recordable injury/illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category.

(2) The information required pursuant to this subdivision shall be verified under oath by the construction manager and its members in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information that is not a public record pursuant to the
 California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(b) For each RFQ, the department shall generate a final list of qualified persons or firms that participated in the RFQ prior to entering into negotiations on the contract or contracts to which the RFQ applies.

(c) (1) For each contract included in the RFQ, the department shall enter into separate negotiations for the contract with the highest qualified person or firm on the final list for that contract. However, if the RFQ is for multiple contracts and specifies that all of the multiple contracts will be awarded to a single construction manager, there may be a single negotiation for all of the multiple contracts.
 The negotiations shall include consideration of compensation and other contract terms that the department determines to be fair and reasonable to the department. In making this decision, the department shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity, and the nature of the professional services or construction services to be rendered. If the department is not able to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the highest qualified person or firm on the final list, regarding compensation and on other contract terms the department determines to be fair and reasonable, the department shall formally terminate negotiations with that person or firm. The department may undertake negotiations with the next most qualified person or firm on the final list in sequence until an agreement is reached, or a determination is made to reject all persons or firms on the final list.

(2) If a contract for construction services is entered into pursuant to this article and includes preconstruction services by the construction manager, the department shall enter into a written contract with the construction manager for preconstruction services under which contract the department shall pay the construction manager a fee for preconstruction services in an amount agreed upon by the department and the construction manager. The preconstruction services contract may include fees for services to be performed during the contract period provided, however, the department shall not request or obtain a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price for the construction contract from the construction manager or enter into a construction contract with the construction manager until after the department has entered into a preconstruction
 services contract that shall provide for the subsequent negotiation for construction of all or any discreet phase or phases of the project.

(3) A contract for construction services shall be awarded after the plans have been sufficiently developed and either a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price has been successfully negotiated. If a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price is not negotiated, the department shall not award the contract for construction services.

(4) The department is not required to award the construction services contract.

(5) Construction shall not commence on any phase, package, or element until the department and construction manager agree in writing on either a fixed price that the department
 will pay for the construction to be commenced or a guaranteed maximum price for the construction to be commenced and construction schedule for the project. The construction manager shall perform not less than 30 percent of the work covered by the fixed price or guaranteed maximum price agreement reached. Work that is not performed directly by the construction manager shall be bid to subcontractors pursuant to Section 10112.5.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 28, Sec. 129.   (SB 1380)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.4.

(a) Any construction manager that is selected to construct a project pursuant to this article shall possess or obtain sufficient bonding to cover the contract amount for construction services and risk and liability insurance as the department may require.

(b) Any payment or performance bond written for the purposes of this article shall be written using a bond form developed by the department.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.5.

All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this article shall be afforded the protections contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1. The construction manager shall do all of the following:

(a) Provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department.

(b) Provide a fixed date and time on which the subcontracted work will be awarded in accordance with the procedure established pursuant to this chapter.

(c) Comply with any subcontracting procedures adopted by the department that were included in the department’s RFQ. If the department has adopted procedures to prequalify public works contractors, the construction manager may use the procedures to prequalify subcontractors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.6.

The department may retain the services of a design professional or construction project manager, or both, throughout the course of the project in order to ensure compliance with this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.7.

A contract awarded pursuant to this article before it is repealed on January 1, 2033, shall continue in full force and effect until completion, including any subsequently executed changes to the contract, or termination.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.8.

Nothing in this article is intended to affect, expand, alter, or limit any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.9.

(a) The department shall prepare and submit to the Legislature an interim report no later than July 1, 2025, that describes each Construction Manager/General Contractor project approved under this article beginning January 1, 2022, and that provides relevant data, including, but not limited to, cost, the stage of completion, and estimated time to completion.

(b) The department shall prepare and submit to the Legislature a final report, no later than July 1, 2028, that provides the relevant data referenced in subdivision (a) for projects that were approved under this article as of January 1, 2027.

(c) Both the interim and final reports shall provide a comprehensive assessment on the effectiveness of the Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery method relative to project cost and time savings.

(d) A report to be submitted pursuant to this subdivision shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10112.10.)
-------------------------------------------

10112.10.

(a) The authority to perform water resources projects pursuant to this article is for no more than seven
 projects.

(b) This article shall remain in effect until January 1, 2033, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 1.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Article 1.1, commencing with Section 10112.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.3. Job Order Contracting Procurement Procedure for the Department of General Services [10113. - 10113.1.]

10113.

As used in this article:

(a) “Adjustment factor” means the job order contractor’s competitively bid adjustment to the department’s prices as published in the unit price catalog.

(b) “Department” means the Department of General Services or a successor state agency.

(c) “Director” means the Director of General Services or a designee.

(d) “Job order contract” means a competitively bid contract between the department and a responsible contractor in which the contractor agrees to a fixed period, fixed-unit price, and indefinite quantity contract that provides for job orders for
 public works.

(e) “Technical specifications” means information published by the department detailing the technical specifications with regard to quality of materials and workmanship to be used by the job order contractor in accomplishing the tasks listed in the unit price catalog.

(f) “Unit price” means the amount paid for a single unit of an item of work identified in the unit price catalog multiplied by the contractor’s adjustment factor.

(g) “Unit price catalog” means a compilation of specific construction tasks and the unit prices to install or demolish that construction. The listed tasks shall be based on generally accepted industry standards and information, where available, for various items of work to be performed by the job order contractor. The prices shall include the cost of materials, labor, and
 equipment for performing the items of work. The prices shall not include overhead and profit. All unit prices shall be developed using local prevailing wages.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 997, Sec. 19.   (AB 179)   Effective September 30, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10113.1.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the department may use an alternative procurement procedure for public works contracts, as defined in Section 1101, as provided in this article.

(b) The availability of job order contracting as a public works delivery method shall not preclude the use of other public works delivery methods.

(c) The department may solicit for job order contractors by region, by specific scopes of work, or both.

(d) Solicitations for job order contractors shall progress as follows:

(1) The department shall prepare a set of documents
 for job order contracts. The documents shall include a unit price catalog, job order contract terms, job order contract technical specifications, and any other information deemed necessary by the department.

(2) The department shall prepare a request for bids based on the documents prepared under paragraph (1) that invites job order contractors to submit sealed bids in a manner prescribed by the department.

(3) Each bidding job order contractor shall include in its bid one or more adjustment factors to the established unit prices provided in the request for bids based on the contract technical specifications.

(4) The department may award multiple job order contracts in response to a single job order contract solicitation as determined by the lowest combined adjustment factors as outlined in the invitation for
 bids.

(e) Any architect, engineer, consultant, or contractor retained by the department to assist in the development of the job order contract solicitation documents shall not be eligible to bid or to participate in the preparation of a job order contract bid related to that solicitation.

(f) Each job order executed under a job order contract shall provide an itemized list of each unit description required to complete the work with the unit’s associated unit price and the applied contractor’s adjustment factor.

(g) Job order contracts may be executed for an initial contract term of no more than 24 months.

(h) The maximum total dollar amount that may be awarded under a single job order contract shall not exceed ten million dollars ($10,000,000) in the
 first term of the job order contract. The department may issue up to four one-year extensions to each job order contract, up to an additional five million dollars ($5,000,000) per year.

(i) No single job order may exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000), not including change orders necessary to complete the scope of the original project.

(j) The maximum amounts specified for job order contract value and job order value shall be adjusted each January 1 to reflect the percentage change in the annual California Construction Index as used by the department. The amount shall be rounded off to the nearest one-thousand-dollar figure.

(k) The authority granted to the department by this article shall not be deemed to waive any provision of the Labor Code that would otherwise apply, including, but not limited to, prevailing
 wage rates determined by the Director of Industrial Relations.

(l) It is unlawful to split or separate job orders for the purpose of evading the cost limitation provisions of this section.

(m) (1) A contractor shall not be awarded a job order contract unless the contractor provides an enforceable commitment to the director that the contractor and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work for each job order that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(A) The department has entered into
 a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on each job order to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the contractor agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The job order is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the department before January 1, 2024.

(C) The contractor has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the contractor and all its subcontractors at every tier performing work for each job order to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(n) (1) A
 job order contract shall set forth in the general conditions of the job order contract the party or parties responsible for seeing that the provisions of Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code are complied with.

(2) For purposes of job order contracting, prevailing wages when required to be paid shall apply to all work ordered under the job order contract regardless of thresholds set forth in Section 1771.5 of the Labor Code.

(3) The job order contractor shall pay the prevailing wage in effect at the time the job order is issued by the department and all increases as published by the Department of Industrial Relations for the term of the job order contract, including all overtime, holiday, and shift provisions published by the Department of Industrial Relations.

(o) It is the intent of this legislation to streamline the delivery of public works. It is not the intent of the Legislature for job order contracting to displace work presently performed by state employees, nor to expand the types of public works performed by contractors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 997, Sec. 19.   (AB 179)   Effective September 30, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.5. Minority and Women Business Participation Goals for State Contracts [10115. - 10115.15.]

10115.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(1) The essence of the American economic system of private enterprise is free competition. Only through full and free competition can free markets, reasonable and just prices, free entry into business, and opportunities for the expression and growth of personal initiative and individual judgment be assured. The preservation and expansion of that competition is basic to the economic well-being of this state and that
 well-being cannot be realized unless the actual and potential capacity of minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises is encouraged and developed. Therefore, it is the declared policy of the state to aid the interests of minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises in order to preserve reasonable and just prices and a free competitive enterprise, to ensure that a fair proportion of the total number of contracts or subcontracts for commodities, supplies, technology, property, and services are awarded to minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises, and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the state.

(2) The opportunity for full participation in our free enterprise system by minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises is essential if this state is to attain social and economic equality for those businesses and improve the functioning of the state economy.

(3) State agencies which have established short- and long-range minority, women, and disabled veteran participation goals are awarding 23 percent or more of their contracts to these business enterprises.

(4) It is in the state’s interest to expeditiously improve the economically disadvantaged position of minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

(5) The economic position of these businesses can be improved by providing long-range substantial goals for procurement by state agencies of commodities, professional services, and construction work from minority, women, and disabled veteran businesses.

(6) Procurement by state agencies of goods and services from these businesses also benefits the state agencies and the citizens of the state by
 encouraging the expansion of the number of vendors for procurements, thereby encouraging competition among the vendors and promoting economic efficiency in the process.

(b) It is the purpose of this article to do all of the following:

(1) Encourage greater economic opportunity for minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

(2) Promote competition among state agencies in order to enhance long-term economic efficiency in the procurement of construction, commodities, and professional services contracts.

(3) Clarify and expand the program for the procurement by state agencies of commodities, professional services, and construction work from minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, contracts awarded by any state agency, department, officer, or other state governmental entity for construction, professional services (except those subject to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 16850) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code), materials, supplies, equipment, alteration, repair, or improvement shall have statewide participation goals of not less than 15 percent for minority business enterprises, not less than 5 percent for women business enterprises and 3 percent for disabled veteran business enterprises. These goals apply to the overall dollar amount expended each year by the awarding department, as defined by Section 10115.1, pursuant to this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1330, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.1.

As used in this article, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Awarding department” means a state agency, department, governmental entity, or other officer or entity empowered by law to enter into contracts on behalf of the State of California.

(b) “Contract” includes an agreement or joint development agreement to provide labor, services, material, supplies, or equipment in the performance of a contract, franchise, concession, or lease granted, let, or awarded for and on behalf of the State of California.

(c) “Contractor” means a person or persons, regardless of race, color, sex, ethnic origin or ancestry, or any firm, partnership, corporation, or
 combination thereof, whether or not a minority or women business enterprise, who submits a bid and enters into a contract with a representative of a state agency, department, governmental entity, or other officer empowered by law to enter into contracts on behalf of the State of California.

(d) “Minority,” for purposes of this section, means a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States who is an ethnic person of color and who is: Black (a person having origins in any of the Black racial groups of Africa); Hispanic (a person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or other Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin regardless of race); Native American (an American Indian, Inuk, Aleut, or Native Hawaiian); Pacific-Asian (a person whose origins are from Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, the Philippines, Samoa, Guam, or the United States Trust Territories of the Pacific, including the Northern
 Marianas); Asian-Indian (a person whose origins are from India, Pakistan, or Bangladesh); or any other group of natural persons identified as minorities in the respective project specifications of an awarding department or participating local agency.

(e) “Minority business enterprise” means a business concern that meets all of the following criteria:

(1) The business is an individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or joint venture at least 51 percent owned by one or more minorities or, in the case of any business whose stock is publicly held, at least 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more minorities.

(2) A business whose management and daily operations are controlled by one or more minorities who own the business.

(3) A business
 concern with its home office located in the United States which is not a branch or subsidiary of a foreign corporation, firm, or other business.

(f) “Women business enterprise” means a business concern that meets all of the following criteria:

(1) The business is an individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or joint venture at least 51 percent owned by one or more women or, in the case of any business whose stock is publicly held, at least 51 percent of the stock is owned by one or more women.

(2) A business whose management and daily operations are controlled by one or more women who own the business.

(3) A business concern with its home office located in the United States which is not a branch or subsidiary of a foreign corporation, firm,
 or other business.

(g) “Goal” means a numerically expressed objective that awarding departments and contractors are required to make efforts to achieve.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 67, Sec. 161.   (AB 1170)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.2.

In awarding contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, the awarding department shall consider the efforts of a bidder to meet minority business enterprise, women business enterprise, and disabled veteran business enterprise goals set forth in this article. The awarding department shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder meeting these goals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, 4th Ex. Sess., Ch. 19, Sec. 1.   Effective July 28, 2009.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.3.

(a) The awarding department shall establish a method of monitoring adherence to the goals specified in this article.

(b) The awarding department shall adopt rules and regulations for the purpose of implementing this article. Emergency regulations consistent with this section may be adopted.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 61, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.4.

In implementing this article, the awarding department shall utilize existing resources such as the Office of Small and Minority Business, the Minority Business Development Agency, and the Small Business Administration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 61, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.6.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the failure of an awarding department to meet the goals established under this article shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any contract or any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the awarding department to provide for the payment of any contract subject to this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 61, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.7.

(a) Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize any awarding department to discriminate in the awarding of any contract on the basis of ancestry or any characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code.

(b) Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize any contractor to discriminate in the solicitation or acceptance of bids for subcontracting, or for materials or equipment, on the basis of ancestry or any characteristic listed or
 defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2007, Ch. 568, Sec. 40.   Effective January 1, 2008.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.8.

If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1229, Sec. 9.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.9.

A limited liability company may be certified as a disabled veteran business enterprise pursuant to this article if the limited liability company is wholly owned by one or more disabled veterans.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 632, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.10.

(a) It shall be unlawful for a person or firm to:

(1) Knowingly and with intent to defraud, fraudulently obtain, retain, attempt to obtain or retain, or aid another in fraudulently obtaining or retaining or attempting to obtain or retain, acceptance or certification as a minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprise, for the purposes of this article.

(2) Willfully and knowingly make a false statement
 with the intent to defraud, whether by affidavit, report, or other representation, to a state official or employee for the purpose of influencing the acceptance or certification or denial of acceptance or certification of any entity as a minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprise.

(3) Willfully and knowingly obstruct, impede, or attempt to obstruct or impede, any state official or employee who is investigating the qualifications of a business entity which has requested acceptance or certification as a minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprise.

(4) Knowingly and with intent to defraud, fraudulently obtain, attempt to obtain, or aid another person or firm in fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, public moneys to which the person is not entitled under this article.

(5) Establish,
 or cooperate in the establishment of, or exercise control over, a firm found to have violated any of paragraphs (1) to (4), inclusive. Any person or firm who violates this paragraph is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for the first violation, and a civil penalty not to exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) for each additional, or subsequent violation. 

(6) This section shall not apply to minority and women business enterprise programs conducted by public utility companies pursuant to the California Public Utilities Commission’s General Order 156.

(b) Any person who violates paragraphs (1) to (4), inclusive, of subdivision (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) for the first violation, and a civil penalty not to exceed
 twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for each additional or subsequent violation.

(c) Any person or firm that violates subdivision (a) shall, in addition to the penalties provided for in subdivision (b), be suspended from bidding on, or participating as either a contractor, subcontractor, or supplier in, any state contract or project for a period of not less than 30 days nor more than one year. However, for an additional or subsequent violation the period of suspension shall be extended for a period of up to three years. Any person or firm that fails to satisfy the penalties imposed pursuant to subdivisions (b) and (c) shall be prohibited from further contracting with the state until the penalties are satisfied.

(d) The awarding department shall report all alleged violations of this section to the Office of Small and Minority Business. The office shall subsequently report all alleged
 violations to the Attorney General who shall determine whether to bring a civil action against any person or firm for violation of this section.

(e) The office shall monitor the status of all reported violations and shall maintain and make available to all state departments a central listing of all firms and persons who have been determined to have committed violations resulting in suspension.

(f) No awarding department shall enter into any contract with any person or firm suspended for violating this section during the period of the person’s or firm’s suspension. No awarding department shall award a contract to any contractor utilizing the services of any person or firm as a subcontractor suspended for violating this section during the period of the person’s or firm’s suspension.

(g) The awarding department shall
 check the central listing provided by the office to verify that the person, firm, or contractor to whom the contract is being awarded, or any person or firm being utilized as a subcontractor by that person, firm, or contractor, is not under suspension for violating this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1032, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.11.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, statewide participation goals for contracts let by the Department of Corrections shall be exclusive of inmate day labor contracts.

(b) The goals established in this article shall also apply to the overall dollar amount expended each year on contracts let by the California Department of Corrections for the purposes of services, maintenance, and supplies excluding contracts for services for inmate medical
 needs.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 10108.6 by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1330, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.12.

(a) Any awarding department taking bids in connection with the award of any contract shall provide in the general conditions under which bids will be received, that any person making a bid or offer to perform a contract shall, in his or her bid or offer, set forth the following information:

(1) The name and the location of the place of business of each subcontractor certified as a minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprise who will perform work or labor or render
 service to the prime contractor in connection with the performance of the contract and who will be used by the prime contractor to fulfill minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise participation goals.

(2) The portion of work that will be done by each subcontractor under paragraph (1). Except in cases of emergency where a contract is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, welfare, or safety, or protection of state property, the prime contractor shall list only one subcontractor for each portion of work as is defined by the prime contractor in his or her bid or offer.

(b) The Subletting and Subcontracting Fair Practices Act (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 shall apply to the information required by subdivision (a) relating to subcontractors certified as minority, women, or disabled veteran business enterprises.

(c) For purposes of this section, “subcontractor” and “prime contractor” shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in Section 4113.

(d) As used in this section, “contract” does not include a contract negotiated pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1032, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.13.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, contracts awarded by any state agency, department, officer, or other state governmental entity for the purchase of general public advertisements shall have statewide participation goals of not less than 15 percent for minority business enterprises, not less than five percent for women business enterprises, and three percent for disabled veteran business enterprises. These goals apply to the overall dollar amount expended each year by the awarding state agency, department, offices, or other state governmental
 entity.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1034, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

10115.15.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 10115.2, when awarding contracts for materials, supplies, or equipment, including electronic data processing goods and services, an awarding department shall accept the submission by a bidder of a minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise utilization plan that has been approved prior to the solicitation due date by the Department of General Services. A business utilization plan shall be considered approved by the Department of General Services as of the date submitted to the department so long
 as the plan meets the minimum criteria established in paragraphs (1) to (12), inclusive, and shall be valid for a period of one year, unless the department has audited the utilization plan, as authorized under subdivision (b), and disapproves it for reasons specified under subdivision (c). The decision of whether to establish a minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise utilization plan shall be at the option of the vendor. If a bidder cites an approved utilization plan in response to the minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise participation requirements of a solicitation that calls for 15 percent minority-owned, 5 percent women-owned, and 3 percent disabled veteran-owned business participation, then that utilization plan shall be considered responsive to the participation goals of the solicitation document. If a solicitation specifies higher participation goals than those in the bidder’s utilization plan, the bidder shall meet the goals in the solicitation. At a minimum, the
 utilization plan shall include the following information:

(1) A statement of the vendor’s minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise utilization plan, including the primary objectives of the utilization plan.

(2) An explanation showing sufficient business reasons why the vendor did not meet minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise participation goals set forth in the vendor’s minority, women, and disabled veteran business utilization plan submitted to, and approved by, the Department of General Services in the previous year, if applicable. Further, if the vendor did not meet the minority, women, and disabled veteran business participation goals in the previous year, the vendor shall also identify remedial steps it will take to meet the goals in the current utilization plan.

(3) A
 statement of the vendor’s minority, women, and disabled veteran business utilization goals for the succeeding year. At a minimum, these utilization goals shall be equal to the statewide participation goals set forth in subdivision (c) of Section 10115.

(4) Estimated total dollars to be subcontracted by the vendor for sales within the United States for the succeeding year.

(5) Estimated total dollars to be subcontracted by the vendor for sales within the State of California for the succeeding year.

(6) Total dollars expressed as a percentage of the amount estimated pursuant to paragraph (4), intended to be subcontracted with each of the following:

(A) Minority business enterprises.

(B) Women business enterprises.

(7) Total dollars, expressed as a percentage of the amount estimated pursuant to paragraph (5), intended to be subcontracted with disabled veteran-owned business enterprises.

(8) A representative listing of the products and services that the vendor anticipates subcontracting, including an identification of the types of subcontracting planned for minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

(9) The name of the individual employed by the vendor who will administer the vendor’s utilization plan, including a description of the duties of the individual.

(10) A description of the efforts that the vendor will undertake to ensure that minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises will have
 an equitable opportunity to compete for contracts.

(11) A listing of the records and reports that the vendor will maintain to demonstrate the practices and procedures that have been adopted to comply with the requirements and goals of the utilization plan.

(12) Affirmation that the vendor met the statewide minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise utilization goals for the previous year, if applicable.

(b) The Department of General Services shall conduct random audits of the submitted utilization plans to determine compliance with this article, and shall retain on file all submitted utilization plans for auditing purposes. During any audit of a submitted utilization plan, the Department of General Services may ask a vendor to submit a list of all the minority, women, and disabled veteran business
 enterprises included as subcontractors in the vendor’s plan for the previous year. This information shall remain confidential. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the Department of General Services to audit all of the minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise utilization plans submitted by individual vendors. The Department of General Services may establish appropriate fees to cover the actual costs of conducting random audits and retaining on file all submitted plans.

(c) (1) At any time, the Department of General Services may disapprove a vendor’s minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise utilization plan for any of the following reasons:

(A) The utilization plan fails to evidence a vendor’s intention to comply fully with the statewide minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise goals for the
 succeeding year, as indicated by failure of the utilization plan to contain the information specified in subdivision (a).

(B) The utilization plan fails to evidence sufficient business reasons for failure to achieve the minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise goals set forth in a utilization plan submitted in the previous year, if applicable.

(C) The utilization plan fails to evidence sufficient remedial steps the vendor will take if the vendor did not meet the minority, women, and disabled veteran business participation goals in the previous year, if applicable.

(2) If a vendor’s utilization plan is disapproved, the vendor may not submit a new utilization plan to the department for a period of one year from the date of disapproval. Prior to disapproval of a vendor’s utilization plan, the vendor
 shall be entitled to a public hearing and to five days’ notice of the time and place thereof. The notice shall state the reasons for the hearing.

(3) A vendor that submits a minority, women, and disabled veteran business utilization plan that is approved by the Department of General Services, and that is subsequently awarded a contract to which the vendor would not otherwise have been entitled, and who fails to evidence intention to fully comply with the minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise goals in the utilization plan, or fails to evidence sufficient business reasons for failing to achieve the minority, women, and disabled veteran business enterprise goals set forth in the utilization plan, shall:

(A) Pay to the state any difference between the contract amount and what the state’s cost would have been if the contract had been properly awarded.

(B) In addition to the amount specified in subparagraph (A), be assessed a penalty in an amount of not more than 10 percent of the amount of the contract involved.

(C) Be ineligible to transact any business with the state for a period of not less than three months and not more than 24 months.

Prior to imposition of any sanction under this chapter, the contractor or vendor shall be entitled to a public hearing and to five days’ notice of the time and place thereof. The notice shall state the reasons for the hearing.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, 4th Ex. Sess., Ch. 19, Sec. 2.   Effective July 28, 2009.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Plans and Specifications [10120. - 10129.]

10120.

Before entering into any contract for a project, the department shall prepare full, complete, and accurate plans and specifications and estimates of cost, giving such directions as will enable any competent mechanic or other builder to carry them out.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10121.

The original draft or a certified copy of the plans, specifications, and estimates of cost shall be filed permanently in the office of the department before further action is taken.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 857, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

10122.

Work on all projects shall be done under contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to this part, except that it may be done by day’s labor under the direction of the department, by contract upon informal bids, or by a combination thereof:

(a) In case of emergency due to the failure or threat of failure of any bridge or other highway structure.

(b) In case of emergency due to the failure or threat of failure of any dam, reservoir, aqueduct, or other water facility or
 facility appurtenant thereto.

(c) In case of emergency due to damage to a state-owned building or any other state-owned real property or improvements located thereon, by an act of God, including but not limited to damage by storm, flood, fire or earthquake, for work and remedial measures which are required immediately.

(d) At any time after the approval of plans, specifications and estimates of cost, if the director deems the advertising or award of a contract, the acceptance of any bid, or the acceptance of any further bids after the rejection of all submitted bids, is not in the best interests of the state.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.   Note: This text was suspended from Jan. 1, 1985, until Jan. 1, 1991, during operation of the temporary amendment by Stats. 1984, Ch. 758.)
-------------------------------------------

10122.5.

For the purposes of Section 10122, all day labor utilized by the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall be performed by individuals who are represented by a duly authorized employee representative unless individuals with that qualification are not reasonably available.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2008, Ch. 116, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2009.)
-------------------------------------------

10122.6.

Notwithstanding the project cost limit provided in Section 10105, work in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) which would otherwise constitute a project, shall not be done by day’s labor unless the requirements of Section 10122 are met.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 615, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

10123.

Contracts upon informal bids authorized under Section 10122 shall be let only to a holder of a valid state contractor’s license unless such work is exempt from such licensing requirement by any other provision of law.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10124.

Bids may be received and contracts awarded on a unit basis, that is, the bids compared upon the basis of estimates of the quantities of the work to be done.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10125.

Except in unit basis contracts, contracts shall not be made exceeding in amount the estimates of costs approved by the director and plans and specifications and estimates of costs including expense of advertising and inspection, shall not be approved by the director requiring a greater expenditure of money than is appropriated for the specific purpose in the law authorizing the expenditure.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10126.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10125, the estimate of cost may be approved by the director, which includes alternates contemplating additions to, or deletions from, the base bid, provided that all of the following requirements are met:

(a) Estimates are made for each contingency and, in the aggregate, the alternates do not exceed 10 percent of the estimated cost for the project.

(b) The available funds are at least
 sufficient to cover the filed estimate for the base project.

(c) Whenever additive or deductive items are included in a bid, the bid solicitation shall specify which one of the following methods will be used to determine the lowest bid. In the absence of such a specification, only the method provided by paragraph (1) will be used:

(1) The lowest bid shall be the lowest bid price on the base contract without consideration of the prices on the additive or deductive items.

(2) The lowest bid shall be the lowest total of the bid prices on the base contract and those additive or deductive items that were specifically identified in the bid solicitation as being used for the purpose of determining the lowest bid price.

(3) The lowest bid shall be the lowest
 total of the bid prices on the base contract and those additive or deductive items that, when taken in order from a specifically identified list of those items in the solicitation, and added to, or subtracted from, the base contract, are less than, or equal to, a funding amount publicly disclosed by the department before the first bid is opened.

(4) The lowest bid shall be determined in a manner that prevents any information that would identify any of the bidders or proposed subcontractors or suppliers from being revealed to the public entity before the ranking of all bidders from lowest to highest has been determined.

(d) The contract is awarded to the lowest bidder, as determined by the method prescribed in subdivision (c).

(e) A responsible bidder who submitted the lowest bid as determined by this section shall be
 awarded the contract, if it is awarded. This section does not preclude the department from adding to or deducting from the contract any of the additive or deductive items after the lowest responsible bidder has been determined.

(f) Nothing in this section shall preclude the prequalification of subcontractors.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 455, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

10127.

The department may, with the approval of the State Public Works Board, receive bids for the construction of several public works projects as a single project. Where more than one appropriation has been made for the several projects united as a single project under the provisions of this section, payments for the single project shall be made from the separate appropriations on the proportional basis that may be determined by the department and approved by the Department of Finance. In the case of several projects united as a single project pursuant to this
 section, those projects shall be within 100 miles of one another.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 857, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

10128.

All contracts awarded under this part shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code relating to public works contracts and shall contain all the contract provisions required therein.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10129.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 3400, no agency of the state charged with the letting of contracts for the construction, alteration, or repair of public works may draft or cause to be drafted specifications for bids, in connection with the construction, alteration, or repair of public works, (1) in a manner that limits the bidding, directly or indirectly, to any one specific concern, or (2) calling for a designated material, product, thing, or service by specific brand or trade name unless the specification is followed by the words “or equal” so
 that bidders may furnish any equal material, product, thing, or service. In applying this section, the awarding authority shall, if aware of an equal product manufactured in this state, name that product in the specification. Specifications shall provide a period of time prior to or after, or prior to and after, the award of the contract for submission of data substantiating a request for a substitution of “an equal” item. If no time period is specified, data may be submitted any time within 35 days after the award of the contract.

(b) Subdivision (a) is not applicable if the awarding authority, or its designee, makes a finding that is described in the invitation for bids or request for proposals that a particular material, product, thing, or service is designated by specific brand or trade name for any of the following purposes:

(1) In order that a field test or experiment may be
 made to determine the product’s suitability for future use.

(2) In order to match other products in use on a particular public improvement either completed or in the course of completion.

(3) In order to obtain a necessary item that is only available from one source.

(4) In order to respond to an emergency declared by the state, a state agency, or political subdivision of the state, but only if the facts setting forth the reasons for the finding of the emergency are contained in the public records of the authority issuing the invitation for bid or request for proposals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 233, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Advertisements for Bids [10140. - 10141.]

10140.

(a) Public notice of a project shall be given by publication once a week for at least two consecutive weeks or once a week for more than two consecutive weeks if the longer period of advertising is deemed necessary by the department, as follows:

(1) In a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the project is located, or if located in more than one county, in such a newspaper in a county in which a major portion of the work is to be done.

(2) In a trade paper of general circulation published in San Francisco for projects located in County Group No. 1, as defined in Section 187 of the Streets and Highways Code, or in Los Angeles for projects located in County Group No. 2, as
 defined in Section 187 of the Streets and Highways Code, devoted primarily to the dissemination of contract and building news among contracting and building materials supply firms.

(b) The department may publish the notice to bidders for a project in additional trade papers or newspapers of general circulation that it deems advisable.

(c) (1) In the case of the Department of Transportation, instead of the public notice described in subdivision (a), the public notice requirement of this section may instead be met by publishing the public notice electronically on that department’s Internet Web site.

(2) If the department exercises its authority under paragraph (1), the department shall also publish information regarding notices listed on the department’s Internet Web site in trade papers,
 newspapers, or magazines, as appropriate in order to ensure all communities have access to the public notice, including those publications whose primary audience consists of underrepresented groups, including, but not limited to, women, minorities, LGBT, and disabled veterans, pursuant to the frequency requirements specified in subdivision (a).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 95, Sec. 9.   (SB 103)   Effective July 21, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

10141.

The notice shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids, describing in general terms the work to be done and that the bids will be required for the entire project and for the performance of separate designated parts of the entire project, when the department determines that segregation is advisable.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Bids and Bidders [10160. - 10169.]

10160.

The department may require from prospective bidders answers to questions contained in a standard form of questionnaire and financial statement including a complete statement of the prospective bidder’s financial ability and experience in performing public works. When completed, the questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which pleadings in civil actions are verified.

Whenever prequalification is required of any bidder on a contract, it shall be required for all
 prospective bidders to that contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1993, Ch. 471, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

10161.

The department may also require from prospective bidders the completion, under penalty of perjury, of a standard form of questionnaire concerning the past safety record of each prospective bidder, any officer of such bidder, and any managing employee of such bidder. The department may refuse to prequalify any prospective bidder who fails to submit a completed questionnaire when required, or for the reason that the information contained in the submitted questionnaire or otherwise known to the department indicates a continuing unsatisfactory safety record.

The director of the department shall prescribe guidelines listing criteria
 which will be utilized administratively in determining an unsatisfactory safety record. A refusal by the department to prequalify a prospective bidder shall be issued only after the department has granted such bidder a hearing.

This section shall in no way abridge or restrict the right of the department to later determine whether the low bidder on a particular project is the lowest responsible bidder for purposes of award of the contract, including the holding of hearings thereon.

The Director of Industrial Relations shall approve the standard form of questionnaire and the guidelines listing criteria which will be utilized administratively by the department in determining an unsatisfactory safety record prior to their use by the department.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10162.

The department shall require from all prospective bidders the completion, under penalty of perjury, of a standard form of questionnaire inquiring whether such prospective bidder, any officer of such bidder, or any employee of such bidder who has a proprietary interest in such bidder, has ever been disqualified, removed, or otherwise prevented from bidding on, or completing a federal, state, or local government project because of a violation of law or a safety regulation, and if so to explain the circumstances.

A bid may be rejected on the basis of a bidder, any officer of such bidder, or any employee of such bidder who has a
 proprietary interest in such bidder, having been disqualified, removed, or otherwise prevented from bidding on, or completing a federal, state, or local project because of a violation of law or a safety regulation.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10163.

The department shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders, on the basis of the standard questionnaires and financial statements, in respect to the size of the contracts upon which each bidder is qualified to bid. When bids for more than one project are to be received at the same bid opening, the department may permit a bidder to submit bids for each project within such bidder’s prequalification rating, even though such rating is insufficient to permit the bidder to be awarded the contract for each project bid upon.

In no event shall any bidder be awarded a contract if such contract award would result in the bidder
 having under contract work for which prequalification is required in excess of that authorized by his prequalification rating. In determining whether an award of a contract would result in a bidder having under contract work in excess of that authorized by his prequalification rating, the department may use its estimated cost of such contract rather than the amount of the bidder’s bid. If the department determines that a bidder would be awarded the contract for two or more projects but cannot be awarded the contract for all such projects because of the inadequacy of his prequalification rating, the department shall determine which of the bids of such bidder are to be accepted and the contract awarded thereon and which of the bids of such bidder are to be disregarded. In making its decision the department shall be guided by the combination of contract awards which will result in the lowest total cost for the projects involved.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10164.

In all state projects where federal funds are involved, no bid submitted shall be invalidated by the failure of the bidder to be licensed in accordance with the laws of this state. However, at the time the contract is awarded, the contractor shall be properly licensed in accordance with the laws of this state. The contract shall not be awarded unless the state agency has verified that the contractor has a valid license in the appropriate classification for the work performed. Any bidder or contractor not so licensed shall be subject to all legal penalties imposed
 by law, including, but not limited to, any appropriate disciplinary action by the Contractors State License Board. The department shall include a statement to that effect in the standard form of prequalification questionnaire and financial statement. Failure of the bidder to obtain proper and adequate licensing for an award of a contract shall constitute a failure to execute the contract as provided in Section 10181 and shall result in the forfeiture of the security of the bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 432, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

10165.

The questionnaires and financial statements are not public records and are not open to public inspection.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10166.

The department shall furnish to each bidder a standard proposal form, which, when filled out and executed may be submitted as his bid. Bids not presented on forms so furnished shall be disregarded. The department shall not furnish proposal forms to any person who is required to submit and has not submitted a questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification at least five days prior to the date fixed for publicly opening sealed bids and been prequalified for at least one day prior to that date.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10167.

(a) All bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(1) An electronic bidder’s bond by an admitted surety insurer submitted using an electronic registry service approved by the department advertising the contract.

(2) A signed bidder’s bond by an admitted surety insurer received by the department advertising the contract.

(3) Cash, a cashier’s check, or certified check received by, and made payable to, the director of the department advertising the contract.

(b) The required bidder’s security shall be in an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the amount bid. A bid shall not be considered unless one of the forms of bidder’s security is enclosed with it.

(c) All bids submitted pursuant to this section shall also comply with the provisions of Section 1601 of the Public Contract Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 290, Sec. 3.   (AB 1671)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

10168.

Whether or not bids are opened exactly at the time fixed in the public notice for opening bids, a bid shall not be received after that time.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10169.

Any bid may be withdrawn at any time prior to the time fixed in the public notice for the opening of bids only by written request for the withdrawal of the bid filed with the director of the department or the chief of the division under which the work is to be performed. The request shall be executed by the bidder or his duly authorized representative. The withdrawal of a bid does not prejudice the right of the bidder to file a new bid.

This section does not authorize the withdrawal of any bid after the time fixed in the public notice for the opening of bids.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 5. Award of Contracts [10180. - 10186.]

10180.

On the day named in the public notice, the department shall publicly open the sealed bids and award the contracts to the lowest responsible bidders.

In the case of bids opened by a district director, pursuant to Section 10141, he shall report the contents thereof to the director. In all other respects, the contracts shall be awarded as are other contracts.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10181.

If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract, his bidder’s security shall be forfeited to the state. The cash or proceeds shall be deposited in the fund out of which the expenses of preparation and printing of the plans and specifications, estimates of cost, and publication of notice are paid.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10182.

If the director deems it is for the best interests of the state, he may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder.

If the second lowest responsible bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the director may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder. 

On the failure or refusal of the second or third lowest bidder, to whom a contract is so awarded, to execute it, his bidder’s security shall be likewise forfeited to the state.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10183.

The failure of the successful bidder to furnish any bond required of him by law, within the time fixed for his execution of the contract, constitutes a failure to execute the contract.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10184.

The bidders’ security of the second and third lowest responsible bidders may be withheld until the contract has been finally executed. The cash, cashier’s checks and certified checks submitted by all other unsuccessful bidders shall be returned to them within 10 days after the contract is awarded, and their bidders’ bonds shall be of no further effect.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10185.

If the director deems the acceptance of the lowest responsible bid or bids is not for the best interests of the state, after stating his or her reasons for rejecting the bid or bids, the director may reject all bids and proceed by day’s labor or advertise for other bids in the manner required by this part.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1985, Ch. 410, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10186.

(a) This section shall be known, and may be cited, as the “Fair Chance Employment Act.”

(b) Any person submitting a bid to the state on a contract involving onsite construction-related services shall certify that the person will not ask an applicant for onsite construction-related employment to disclose orally or in writing information concerning the conviction history of the applicant on or at the time of an initial employment application.

(c) This section shall not apply to a position for which the person or the state is otherwise required by state or federal law to conduct a conviction history background check or to any contract position
 with a criminal justice agency, as that term is defined in Section 13101 of the Penal Code.

(d) This section shall not apply to a person to the extent that he or she obtains workers from a hiring hall pursuant to a bona fide collective bargaining agreement.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 880, Sec. 1.   (AB 1650)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6. State Agency Design-Build Projects [10187. - 10195.]

10187.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the design-build method of project delivery, using a best value procurement methodology, has been authorized for various agencies that have reported benefits from such projects including reduced project costs, expedited project completion, and design features that are not achievable through the traditional design-bid-build method.

(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the following occur:

(1) This article provides general authorization for certain state agencies to use design-build for projects, excluding projects on the state highway system.

(2) This article shall not be deemed to provide a preference for the design-build method over other procurement methodologies.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 6.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10187.5.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions and the definitions in subdivision (a) of Section 13332.19 of the Government Code shall apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that relate to price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the department and meeting the objectives of the project, selection of the best proposal for a stipulated sum established by the procuring agency, or a tradeoff between price and other specified factors.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Department” means the Department of General Services, the Military Department, and the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation.

(d) “Design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are
 procured from a single entity.

(e) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(f) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(g) “Director” means, with respect to procurements undertaken by the Department of General Services, the
 Director of General Services; with respect to procurements undertaken by the Military Department, the Adjutant General; with respect to procurements undertaken by the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, the secretary of that department.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 2.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.)
-------------------------------------------

10188.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the director, following notification to the State Public Works Board, may procure design-build contracts for public works projects in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000), awarding the contract using either the low bid or best value, provided that this article shall not apply to any projects on the state highway system.

(b) The director shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity, that performs services for the department relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build
 team. This conflict-of-interest policy shall apply to each department entering into design-build contracts authorized under this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 6.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10190.

The director shall notify the State Public Works Board regarding the method to be used for selecting the design-build entity, prior to advertising the design-build project.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 3.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.)
-------------------------------------------

10191.

The procurement process for the design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) The director shall prepare a set of documents setting forth the scope and estimated price of the project. The documents may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or building layouts, or any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the department’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in California.

(2) The documents shall not include a design-build-operate contract for any project. The documents, however, may include operations during a training or transition period but shall not include long-term operations for any project.

(b) The director shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to prequalify or short-list the design-build entities whose proposals shall be evaluated for final selection. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate proposals, the procedure for final
 selection of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the director to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other nonprice-related factors.

(3) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the department. In preparing the standard template, the department may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this article. The template shall require the following information:

(A) If the
 design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to
 design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(4) (A) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(B) Information required under this subdivision that is not otherwise
 a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(c) (1) A design-build entity shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the director that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(A) The department has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the department prior to January 1, 2017.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same
 meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(d) Based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), the director shall prepare a request for proposals that invites prequalified or short-listed entities to submit competitive sealed proposals in the manner prescribed by the department. The request for proposals shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the estimated cost of the project, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate proposals, whether the contract will be awarded on the basis of low bid or best value, and any other information deemed necessary by the department to inform interested parties of the contracting
 opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating proposals, including, but not limited to, cost or price and all nonprice-related factors.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for proposals.

(4) Where a best value selection method is used, the department may reserve the right to request proposal revisions and hold discussions and negotiations with responsive proposers, in which case the department shall so specify in the request for proposals and shall publish separately or incorporate into the request for proposals applicable procedures to be observed by the department to ensure that any discussions or
 negotiations are conducted in good faith.

(e) For those projects utilizing low bid as the final selection method, the competitive bidding process shall result in lump-sum bids by the prequalified or short-listed design-build entities, and awards shall be made to the design-build entity that is the lowest responsible bidder.

(f) For those projects utilizing best value as a selection method, the design-build competition shall progress as follows:

(1) Competitive proposals shall be evaluated by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for proposals. The following minimum factors, however, shall be weighted as deemed appropriate by the department:

(A) Price, unless a stipulated sum is specified.

(B) Technical design and construction expertise.

(C) Life-cycle costs over 15 or more years.

(2) Pursuant to subdivision (d), the department may hold discussions or negotiations with responsive proposers using the process articulated in the department’s request for proposals.

(3) When the evaluation is complete, the responsive proposers shall be ranked based on a determination of value provided, provided that no more than three proposers are required to be ranked.

(4) The award of the contract
 shall be made to the responsible design-build entity whose proposal is determined by the director to have offered the best value to the public.

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the director shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award.

(6) The statement regarding the director’s contract award, described in paragraph (5), and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 356.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

10192.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the director, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The department shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 6.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10193.

(a) The department, in each design-build request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that must be included in the design-build entity statement of qualifications and proposal. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the proposal shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, the design-build entity shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work:

(1) Provide public notice of availability of
 work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing. The foregoing process does not apply to construction subcontractors listed in the original proposal. Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 6.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10194.

(a) If the department elects to award a project pursuant to this article, retention proceeds withheld by the department from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld may not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the design-build entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any subcontractor that is not a member of the design-build
 entity, prior to or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 6.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10195.

Nothing in this article affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 6.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.5. Progressive Design-Build Contracting [10198. - 10198.8.]

10198.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that relate to demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. Other factors such as price, features, functions, and life-cycle costs may be considered. If the qualifications-based selection process includes estimates of cost as a factor, a best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the department and meeting the objectives of the project, or a tradeoff between price and other specified factors.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Department” means the Department of General Services.

(d) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(e) “Design-build project” means a capital outlay project using the progressive design-build construction procurement process described in this article.

(f) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(g) “Director” means the Director of General Services or their designee.

(h) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the department and the design-build entity for the design-build entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities
 sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(i) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project.

(j) “Qualifications-based selection” means the process by which the department solicits for services from the design-build entities.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.1.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, and subject to the limitation of paragraph (2), the director may procure progressive design-build contracts.

(2) The authority under this article shall apply to no more than three capital outlay projects, which shall be determined jointly by the department and the Department of Finance.

(b) The director shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the department relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a
 design-build team. This conflict-of-interest policy shall apply to each department entering into design-build contracts authorized under this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.2.

The procurement process for progressive design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) The department shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to select a design-build entity to execute the project. The request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, the following elements:

(1) Documentation of the size, type, and desired design character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the department’s needs, including the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate the design-build entity’s qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and any
 other information deemed necessary by the department to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other nonprice-related factors. The department may require that a cost estimate, including the detailed basis for the estimate, be included in the design-build entities’ responses and consider those costs in evaluating the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A request for statements of qualifications with a template for the statement that is prepared by the department. The department shall require all of the following
 information in the statement and indicate, in the template, that the following information is required:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the entity’s shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of the statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(5) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(b) (1) A design-build entity shall not be evaluated for selection unless the entity provides an enforceable
 commitment to the director that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if one or more of the following requirements are met:

(A) The department has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the department
 prior to January 1, 2022.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has meaning provided in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(c) At the close of the solicitation period, the department shall review the submissions. The department may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build entities’ statement of qualifications. The department may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the project.

(d) Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the department shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the department’s contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.3.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the director, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The department shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.4.

(a) After selecting a design-build entity based upon qualifications, the department may enter into a contract and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a guaranteed maximum price for the project.

(b) (1) Subject to Section 13332.19 of the Government Code, upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the project, the department, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract to direct the design-build entity to complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project, and may add funds not exceeding the guaranteed maximum price to the contract for these activities.

(2) If the cost for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project exceed the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the cost for these activities are less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the cost and the guaranteed maximum price. These amounts shall revert to the fund from which the appropriation was made.

(c) If the department and the design-build entity do not reach agreement on a guaranteed maximum price, or the department otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract to complete the remaining work, the department may solicit proposals to complete the project from firms that submitted statements of qualifications
 pursuant to Section 10198.2. The department may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the state to do so, formally solicit proposals from other design-build entities. Subject to Section 13332.19 of the Government Code, contract award shall be made on a best value basis.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.5.

(a) The department, in each design-build request for qualifications, may identify specific types of subcontractors that shall be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications, the design-build entity shall proceed as listed in this subdivision in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work.

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(c) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.6.

(a) If the department elects to award a project pursuant to this article, retention proceeds withheld by the department from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation. Work performed to establish the guaranteed maximum price shall not be subject to retention.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the design-build entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any
 subcontractor that is not a member of the design-build entity, before or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required, and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.7.

Nothing in this article affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

10198.8.

(a) The department shall submit to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee, on or before January 1, 2026, a report containing a description of each public works project procured by the department through the progressive design-build process described in this article that is completed after January 1, 2022, and before December 1, 2025.

(b) The report described in subdivision (a) shall include, but is not limited to, all of the following information:

(1) The type of project.

(2) The gross square footage of the project.

(3) The design-build entity
 that was awarded the project.

(4) The estimated and actual project costs.

(5) An assessment of the selection process and criteria required by this article.

(6) An assessment of the effects of the progressive design-build process described in this article on cost and schedule for the project.

(7) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that provided design services, but did not meet the target price for their scope of work and therefore did not perform construction services on that project.

(8) Whether or not any portion of a design prepared by the specialty subcontractor that did not perform the construction work for that design was used
 by the department.

(9) In instances where the department determined that the guaranteed maximum price of any subcontract exceeded the anticipated target price for that portion of the project, which subcontracts were impacted and on what basis the department determined what the anticipated target price was.

(10) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a small business under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(11) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a microbusiness under paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(c) The report submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 77, Sec. 26.   (AB 137)   Effective July 16, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.5.1. San Quentin Progressive Design-Build Contracting [10199. - 10199.6.]

10199.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that may include, but are not limited to, cost factors, price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the department and meeting the objectives of the project, or a tradeoff between cost and other specified factors.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the
 construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Department” means the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation.

(d) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(e) “Design-build project” means the San Quentin Rehabilitation Center, San Quentin: Demolition of Building 38 and Construction of New Educational and
 Vocational Center project authorized in the 2023 Budget Act, which includes the demolition of Building 38 and the design and construction of a new educational and vocational center, using the progressive design-build construction procurement process described in this article.

(f) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all civil, geotechnical, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(g) “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation or their designee.

(h) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the department and the design-build
 entity for the design-build entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project.

(i) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which the design, preconstruction services, and construction of a project are procured, in one or more stages, from a single design-build entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project. However, the progressive design-build model offers flexibility to retain a different entity for the construction phase of the project, should the parties be unable to agree, after a specified portion of the design phase is complete, on a guaranteed maximum price for the construction phase.

(j) “Qualifications-based selection” means the process by
 which the department solicits for services from the design-build entities and that best value is the basis of the award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10199.1.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the secretary may procure progressive design-build contracts for the design-build project.

(b) The secretary shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the department relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a statement of qualifications, a proposal, or both as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10199.2.

The procurement process for a progressive design-build project shall progress as follows:

(a) The department shall determine the scope and estimated price of the design-build project. The determination may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the department’s needs.

(b) The department shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications. The request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, all of the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the design-build
 project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the department to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other non-price-related factors. The department may require that a cost estimate, including the detailed basis for the estimate, be included in the design-build entities’ responses and consider those costs in evaluating the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A request for statements of qualifications with a template for the statement that is prepared by the department. The department shall require all of the following information in the statement and indicate, in the template, that all of the following information is required:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the entity’s shareholders, partners, or members who will perform work on the project that are known at the time of the statement of qualification is submitted.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have
 sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the design-build project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the design-build project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the
 proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(H) A full disclosure regarding each of the following, if applicable:

(i) Any serious or
 willful violation of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the design-build entity.

(ii) Any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project.

(iii) Any instance in which the design-build entity, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(iv) Any instance in which the design-build entity, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, defaulted on a construction contract.

(v) Any violations of the Contractors
 State License Law, as described in Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, including alleged violations of federal or state law regarding the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or Federal Insurance Contributions Act withholding requirements settled against any member of the design-build entity.

(vi) Any bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the design-build entity, including, but not limited to, information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(vii) Any settled adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the design-build entity during the five years preceding submission of a bid under this article in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeded fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also
 be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this five-year period.

(5) The information provided by a design-build entity in response to a request for qualifications shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(c) (1) Following the deadline for submission of a statement of qualifications, the department shall review the submissions. The department may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. The department may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the design-build project. The department may also hold discussions or negotiations with design-build entities using the process described in the department’s request for
 qualifications.

(2) For each request for qualification, the department shall generate a final list of qualified design-build entities that participated in the request for qualifications prior to entering into negotiations for the contract or contracts to which the request for qualifications applies.

(3) If submissions in response to a request for qualifications provide sufficient information to determine which qualified design-build entity has offered the best value to the public, the department may enter into negotiations with the entity concerning contract terms and award a contract or contracts for design and preconstruction services for the demolition of Building 38 and the remainder of the design-build project to that entity. Such contract or contracts shall provide for the subsequent negotiation of terms governing the construction phase of the demolition of Building 38 and
 the remainder of the design-build project. If the department is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract or contracts with that entity for design and preconstruction services, the department may undertake negotiations with another qualified design-build entity that participated in the request for qualifications process.

(4) If additional information is necessary to determine which qualified design-build entity offers the best value to the public, the department may prepare a further request for proposals, based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), that invites qualified design-build entities identified pursuant to paragraph (2) to submit competitive sealed proposals in the manner prescribed by the department.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the department shall publicly announce its award,
 identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10199.3.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the design-build project in the form and in the amount required by the secretary, which are issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the design-build project.

(c) The department shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10199.4.

(a) After selecting a design-build entity for the design and preconstruction phase, the department may enter into a contract or contracts and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a separate guaranteed maximum price for the demolition of Building 38 and the remainder of the design-build project.

(b) Subject to Section 13332.19 of the Government Code, upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project, the department, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract or contracts with the design-build entity or enter into a new contract or contracts, and direct the design-build entity to
 complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project, and may add funds not exceeding the guaranteed maximum price to the contract for these activities. Any amendment of the existing contract or contracts or entering into a new contract or contracts with the design-build entity shall not require any additional competitive process. This section does not require the department to amend an existing contract or enter into a new contract for remaining design, preconstruction, or construction activities.

(c) If the cost for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the design-build project exceeds the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the cost for
 these activities is less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the cost and the guaranteed maximum price. These amounts shall revert to the fund from which the appropriation was made.

(d) If the department and the design-build entity do not reach an agreement on a guaranteed maximum price for the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project, or the department otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract or contracts to complete the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project, the department may solicit proposals to complete the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project from firms that submitted statements of qualifications pursuant to Section 10199.2. The department may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the state to do so, formally solicit
 proposals from other design-build entities to complete the demolition of Building 38 or the remainder of the design-build project or complete the design-build project using other delivery methods. Subject to Section 13332.19 of the Government Code, a contract award shall be made on a best value basis.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10199.5.

(a) The department, in the request for qualifications or request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that are required to be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications or proposal, the design-build entity shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work.

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(c) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10199.6.

This article does not affect, expand, alter, or limit any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 47, Sec. 25.   (AB 134)   Effective July 10, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.5. Department of Water Resources Design-Build Projects [10200. - 10214.]

10200.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the design-build method of project delivery, using a best value procurement methodology, has been authorized for various agencies that have reported benefits from such projects including reduced project costs, expedited project completion, and design features that are not achievable through the traditional design-bid-build method.

(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the following occur:

(1) This article provides specific authorization to the Department of Water Resources.

(2) This article
 shall not be deemed to provide a preference for the design-build method over other procurement methodologies.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10200.5.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions and the definitions in subdivision (a) of Section 13332.19 of the Government Code shall apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that relate to price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the department and meeting the objectives of the project, selection of the best proposal for a stipulated sum established by the procuring agency, or a tradeoff between price and other specified factors.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Department” means the Department of Water Resources.

(d) “Design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity.

(e) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(f) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(g) “Director” means the Director of Water Resources.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10204.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, the director, following any required notification made pursuant to Section 10206, may procure design-build contracts for public works projects in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000) that are at the Salton Sea or that are necessary for the construction, maintenance, or operation of elements of State Water Facilities, as defined in Section 12934 of the Water Code, and may award the contract using either the low bid or best value, provided that this article shall not apply to any projects on the state highway system.

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), this article does not apply to the design or construction of
 through-Delta water conveyances in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta.

(b) The director shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity, that performs services for the department relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team. This conflict-of-interest policy shall apply to each department entering into design-build contracts authorized under this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 60, Sec. 33.   (AB 203)   Effective June 30, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10206.

For purposes of projects at the Salton Sea, the director shall notify the California Water Commission regarding the method to be used for selecting the design-build entry, prior to advertising the design-build project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10208.

The procurement process for the design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) The director shall prepare a set of documents setting forth the scope and estimated price of the project. The documents may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or building layouts, or any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the department’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in California.

(2) The documents shall not include a design-build-operate contract for any project. The documents, however, may include operations during a training or transition period but shall not include long-term operations for any project.

(b) The director shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to prequalify or short-list the design-build entities whose proposals shall be evaluated for final selection. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate proposals, the procedure for final selection
 of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the director to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other non-price-related factors.

(3) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the department. In preparing the standard template, the department may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this article. The template shall require the following information:

(A) If the
 design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to
 design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(4) (A) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(B) Information required under this subdivision that is not otherwise
 a public record under the California Public Records Act
 (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(c) (1) A design-build entity shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the director that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(A) The department has entered into a project labor
 agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the department prior to January 1, 2017.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section
 2500.

(d) Based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), the director shall prepare a request for proposals that invites prequalified or short-listed entities to submit competitive sealed proposals in the manner prescribed by the department. The request for proposals shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the estimated cost of the project, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate proposals, whether the contract will be awarded on the basis of low bid or best value, and any other information deemed necessary by the department to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating proposals, including, but not limited to, cost or price and all non-price-related factors.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for proposals.

(4) Where a best value selection method is used, the department may reserve the right to request proposal revisions and hold discussions and negotiations with responsive proposers, in which case the department shall so specify in the request for proposals and shall publish separately or incorporate into the request for proposals applicable procedures to be observed by the department to ensure that any discussions or negotiations are conducted in good faith.

(e) For those projects utilizing low bid as the final selection method, the competitive bidding process shall result in lump-sum bids by the prequalified or short-listed design-build entities, and awards shall be made to the design-build entity that is the lowest responsible bidder.

(f) For those projects utilizing best value as a selection method, the design-build competition shall progress as follows:

(1) Competitive proposals shall be evaluated by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for proposals. The following minimum factors, however, shall be weighted as deemed appropriate by the department:

(A) Price,
 unless a stipulated sum is specified.

(B) Technical design and construction expertise.

(C) Life-cycle costs over 15 or more years.

(2) Pursuant to subdivision (d), the department may hold discussions or negotiations with responsive proposers using the
 process articulated in the department’s request for proposals.

(3) When the evaluation is complete, the responsive proposers shall be ranked based on a determination of value provided, provided that no more than three proposers are required to be ranked.

(4) The award of the contract shall be made to the responsible design-build entity whose proposal is determined by the director to have offered the best value to the public.

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the director shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award.

(6) The statement regarding the director’s contract award, described in paragraph (5), and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 28, Sec. 130.   (SB 1380)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10209.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the director, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The department shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10210.

(a) The department, in each design-build request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that must be included in the design-build entity statement of qualifications and proposal. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the proposal shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, the design-build entity shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work:

(1) Provide
 public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing. The foregoing process does not apply to construction subcontractors listed in the original proposal. Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10211.

(a) If the department elects to award a project pursuant to this article, retention proceeds withheld by the department from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld may not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the design-build entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any subcontractor that
 is not a member of the design-build entity, prior to or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the department and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10212.

(a) The design-build authorization in Section 10204 shall not include the authority to perform construction inspection services for water resources projects authorized by this article except as provided for in Section 148 of the Water Code.

(b) (1) The Department of Water Resources shall prepare and submit to the Legislature an interim report no later than July 1, 2025, that describes each design-build project approved under this article beginning January 1, 2022, and that provides relevant data, including, but not limited to, cost, the stage of completion, and estimated time to completion.

(2) The department shall prepare and submit to the Legislature a final report, no later than July 1, 2028, that provides the same relevant data for projects that were approved under this article as of January 1, 2027.

(c) Both the interim and final reports shall provide a comprehensive assessment on the effectiveness of the design-build project delivery method relative to project cost and time savings.

(d) A report to be submitted pursuant to this subdivision shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10213.

Nothing in this article affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 247, Sec. 4.   (SB 626)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, pursuant to Section 10214.)
-------------------------------------------

10214.

(a) The authority to procure design-build contracts for State Water Facilities, as defined in Section 12934 of the Water Code, pursuant to this article is for no more than seven projects.

(b) This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2033, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 60, Sec. 34.   (AB 203)   Effective June 30, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2033, by its own provisions.    Note: Repeal affects Article 6.5, commencing with Section 10200.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.7. Progressive Design-Build Projects [10215. - 10215.8.]

10215.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that may include, but are not limited to, cost factors, price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the department and meeting the objectives of the project, or a tradeoff between cost and other specified factors.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the
 construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Department” means any department of the State of California authorized pursuant to Section 10215.1 to utilize progressive design-build contracting.

(d) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a progressive design-build contract.

(e) “Design-build project” means a capital project using the
 progressive design-build construction procurement process described in this article.

(f) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all civil, geotechnical, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(g) “Director” means the director of any department of the State of California authorized pursuant to Section 10215.1 to utilize progressive design-build contracting, or their designee.

(h) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the department and the design-build entity for the design-build entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities
 sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(i) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which the design, preconstruction services, and construction of a project are procured, in one or more stages, from a single design-build entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project. However, the progressive design-build model offers flexibility to retain a different entity for the construction phase of the project, should the parties be unable to agree, after a specified portion of the design phase is complete, on a guaranteed maximum price for the construction phase.

(j) “Qualifications-based selection” means the process by which the department solicits for services from the design-build entities and that best value is the basis of the award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.1.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, both of the following departments may procure progressive design-build contracts for public works projects for which the estimated price, as determined pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 10215.2, exceeds twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000):

(A) The Department of Water Resources as established in Section 120 of the Water Code.

(B) The Department of Transportation as established under Part 5 (commencing with Section 14000) of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(2) This subdivision does not authorize a design-build-operate contract
 for any project. A contract pursuant to this article may provide for operations during a training or transitional period, but shall not include long-term operations for any design-build project.

(3) The progressive design-build authorization in this subdivision shall not include the authority to perform construction inspection services for projects on or interfacing with the state highway system, which shall be performed by the Department of Transportation consistent with Section 91.2 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(4) The progressive design-build authorization in this subdivision shall not include the authority to perform construction inspection services for projects on the State Water Project or any other state-owned or -operated water resources facility, which shall be performed by the Department of Water Resources consistent with Section 148 of the Water Code.

(5) A department described in paragraph (1) shall be limited to utilizing progressive-design build contracts for no more than eight design-build projects.

(b) The director of each department identified in subdivision (a) shall develop guidelines for a standard departmental conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the department relating to the solicitation of a progressive design-build project, to submit a statement of qualifications, a proposal, or both as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team.

(c) This article does not apply to procurement by the Department of Water Resources for the design or construction of through-Delta conveyance facilities of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta or seawater desalination
 projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.2.

The procurement process for progressive design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) The department shall determine the scope and estimated price of the design-build project. The determination may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the department’s needs.

(b) The department shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications. The request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, all of the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the design-build project
 or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the department to evaluate qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the director to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the department reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other nonprice-related factors. The department may require that a cost estimate, including the detailed basis for the estimate, be included in the design-build entities’ responses and consider those costs in evaluating the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A request for a statement of qualifications with a template for the statement that is prepared by the department. The department shall require all of the following information in the statement and indicate, in the template, that all of the following information is required:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the design-build entity’s shareholders, partners, or members who, at the time the statement of qualification is submitted, the design-build entity knows will perform work on the design-build project if the design-build entity is selected by the department.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or
 complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the design-build project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the design-build project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the design-build project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A design-build entity’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the design-build entity is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(H) A full disclosure regarding each of the following, if
 applicable:

(i) Any serious or willful violation of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled or otherwise resolved against any member of the design-build team.

(ii) Any debarment, disqualification, or removal of any member of the design-build team or its owners, officers, or managing employees from a federal, state, or local government public works project.

(iii) Any instance in which a member of the design-build team, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(iv) Any instance in which any
 member of the design-build team, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, defaulted on a construction contract.

(v) Any violations of the Contractors State License Law, as described in Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, by a member of the design-build team or its owners, officers, or managing employees, including alleged violations of Federal or state law regarding the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or federal Insurance Contribution Act withholding requirements settled against any member of the design-build entity.

(vi) Any bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the design-build team, including, but not limited to, information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(vii) Any adverse
 claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the design-build team during the five years preceding submission of a bid under this article, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeded fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) and was settled or otherwise resolved against the design-build entity or any member of the design-build team. Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this five-year period.

(viii) Any adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between any member of the design-build team and any employee of that entity during the five years preceding submission of a bid under this article, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeded fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) and was settled or otherwise resolved against the entity.

(5) The information provided by a design-build entity in
 response to a request for qualifications shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(c) (1) Following the deadline for submission of a statement of qualifications, the department shall review the submissions. The department may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. The department may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the design-build project. The department may also hold discussions or negotiations with design-build entities using the process described in the department’s request for qualifications.

(2) For each request for qualifications, the department shall generate a final list of qualified design-build entities that
 participated in the request for qualifications before entering into negotiations for the contract or contracts to which the request for qualifications applies.

(3) If submissions in response to a request for qualifications provide sufficient information to determine which qualified design-build entity has offered the best value to the public, the department may enter into negotiations with that entity concerning contract terms and award a contract for design and preconstruction services to that entity. Such contract shall provide for the subsequent negotiation of terms governing the construction phase of the design-build project. If the department is unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with that entity for design and preconstruction services, the department may undertake negotiations with a separate qualified design-build entity that participated in the request for qualifications process.

(4) If additional information is necessary to determine which qualified design-build entity offers the best value to the public, the department may prepare a further request for proposals, based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), that invites qualified design-build entities identified pursuant to paragraph (2) to submit competitive sealed proposals in the manner prescribed by the department.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the director shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.3.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the design-build project in the form and in the amount required by the director, which are issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the design-build project.

(c) The department shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.4.

(a) After selecting a design-build entity for the design and preconstruction phase, the department may enter into a contract and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a guaranteed maximum price for the project.

(b) Subject to Section 13332.19 of the Government Code, if otherwise applicable to the department, upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the design-build project, the department, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract with the design-build entity, or enter into a new contract, and direct the entity to complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the design-build
 project, and may add funds not exceeding the guaranteed maximum price to the contract for these activities. Any amendment of the existing contract or a new contract with the design-build entity shall not require any additional competitive process. This section does not require the department to amend an existing contract or enter into a new contract for remaining design, preconstruction, or construction activities.

(c) If the cost for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the design-build project exceeds the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the cost for these activities is less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the cost and the guaranteed maximum price. Any savings provided to the department shall
 revert to the fund from which the appropriation was made.

(d) If the department and the design-build entity do not reach an agreement on a guaranteed maximum price or the department otherwise elects not to have the design-build entity complete some or all of the remaining work, the department may solicit proposals to complete some or all of the remaining work from firms that submitted a statement of qualifications pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 10215.2. The department may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the state to do so, formally solicit proposals from other entities to complete all or some of the remaining work, or complete the design-build project using other delivery methods. Subject to Section 13332.19 of the Government Code, if otherwise applicable to the department, any contract awarded shall be made on a best value basis.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.5.

(a) The department, in each request for qualifications or request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that are required to be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications or proposal, the design-build entity shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work:

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the department, including a fixed date and time on which qualification statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(c) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.6.

(a) Any department authorized by Section 10215.1 to utilize progressive design-build contracts pursuant to this article shall prepare and submit to the Legislature a report by January 1, 2034, that describes each design-build project awarded under this article that has begun construction by January 1, 2033.

(b) The report described in subdivision (a) shall include relevant data including, but not limited to, all of the following information:

(1) The cost of the design-build project.

(2) The current status or stage of the design-build project.

(3) If complete, the completion date of the design-build project.

(4) If incomplete, the estimated completion date of the design-build project.

(c) The report described in subdivision (a) shall also provide a comprehensive assessment on the effectiveness of the progressive design-build project delivery method relative to project cost and time savings.

(d) The report submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.7.

This article does not affect, expand, alter, or limit any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, pursuant to Section 10215.8.)
-------------------------------------------

10215.8.

This article shall remain in effect only until December 31, 2033, and as of that date is repealed. The repeal of this article shall not affect the contracts entered into by the department, or the department’s authority to complete the design-build projects for which a design and preconstruction phase contract has been entered under this article, before December 31, 2033.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (SB 146)   Effective July 10, 2023.   Repealed as of December 31, 2033, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Article 6.7, commencing with Section 10215.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7. Contract Requirements [10220. - 10232.]

10220.

Every contract awarded under this part shall be submitted to the Attorney General or the attorney appointed according to law and authorized to represent the department under which it is to be performed. Such a contract is not binding on the state until the appropriate attorney finds it to be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and endorses such finding thereon.

A certified copy of each contract shall be filed with the Controller, but the failure so to file does not invalidate it.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10221.

Every contract shall provide for the filing of separate performance and payment bonds by the contractor in the form of bonds executed by an admitted surety insurer and not deposits in lieu of bond, subject to the approval of the department.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1982, Ch. 517, Sec. 348.4.)
-------------------------------------------

10222.

(a) Each bond shall equal at least one-half of the contract price, except as otherwise provided in
 Section 9554 of the Civil Code, in the California Toll Bridge Authority Act (Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 30000) of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code), or in subdivision (b).

(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), for projects with a contract price greater than two hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000), the Department of Transportation shall have the discretion to specify that the payment bond shall equal not less than one-half of the contract price or five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000), whichever is less.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 45.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

10223.

The payment bond shall secure the payment of the claims of laborers, mechanics or materialmen employed on the work under the contract and shall contain all other provisions required by law.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10224.

The performance bond shall guarantee the faithful performance of the contract by the contractor.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10225.

No payment shall be made upon the contract to the contractor or any assignee of the contractor until any order by the director that a sufficient surety be substituted on the bond or that a new, additional, or supplemental bond be given, is satisfied. No cancellation of or withdrawal of a surety from a bond is effective unless approved by the director.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1982, Ch. 517, Sec. 348.5.)
-------------------------------------------

10226.

Every contract shall contain a provision in regard to the time when the whole or any specified portion of the work contemplated shall be completed, and shall provide that for each day completion is delayed beyond the specified time, the contractor shall forfeit and pay to the state a specified sum of money, to be deducted from any payments due or to become due to the contractor. The sum so specified is valid as liquidated damages unless manifestly unreasonable under the circumstances existing at the time the contract was made. A contract for a road project, flood control project, or project involving facilities of the State
 Water Resources Development System may also provide for the payment of extra compensation to the contractor, as a bonus for completion prior to the specified time, the provision, if used, to be included in the specifications and to clearly set forth the basis for the payment.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1044, Sec. 1.5.   Effective September 19, 1990.)
-------------------------------------------

10227.

Every contract shall provide that the department may make changes in the plans and specifications pursuant to this part.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10230.

Every contract subject to this part, for which disabled veteran business enterprise participation is included in the bid, shall contain a provision requiring the contractor to comply with rules, regulations, ordinances, and statutes that apply to the California Disabled Veteran Business Enterprise Program as defined in Section 999 of the Military and Veterans Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements of subdivision (d) of Section 999.5 of the Military and Veterans Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2019, Ch. 676, Sec. 5.   (AB 230)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

10231.

Every contract subject to this part shall contain a provision requiring each contractor to comply with all air pollution control rules, regulations, ordinances, and statutes which apply to any work performed pursuant to the contract, including any air pollution control rules, regulations, ordinances, and statutes specified in Section 11017 of the Government Code.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10232.

Every contract shall contain a statement by which the contractor swears under penalty of perjury that no more than one final, unappealable finding of contempt of court by a federal court has been issued against the contractor within the immediately preceding two-year period because of the contractor’s failure to comply with an order of a federal court which orders the contractor to comply with an order of the National Labor Relations Board. For purposes of this section, a finding of contempt does not include any finding which has been vacated, dismissed, or otherwise removed by the court because the contractor has complied with the order which was the
 basis for the finding. The state may rescind any contract in which the contractor falsely swears to the truth of the statement required by this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 89.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7.1. Resolution of Contract Claims [10240. - 10240.13.]

10240.

The remedy for the resolution of claims arising under contracts made under the provisions of this chapter shall be arbitration pursuant to this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.1.

The claimant may initiate arbitration not later than 90 days after the date of service in person or by mail on the claimant of the final written decision by the department on the claim. This limitation shall not apply to any claim founded on any cost audit, latent defect, warranty, or guarantee under the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 857, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.2.

A failure by the claimant to pursue diligently and exhaust, as to the claim, the required administrative procedures set forth in the contract under which the claim arose shall be a bar to arbitration hereunder until there has been compliance therewith. Subject to the preceding sentence, if more than 240 days have elapsed since acceptance of the work by the department, the claimant is entitled to arbitration, even though the procedures are not concluded.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.3.

Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitration shall be conducted by a single arbitrator selected by the parties from the certified list created by the Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee. If the parties cannot agree on the arbitrator, either party may petition the superior court to appoint one from the panel of arbitrators certified by the Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.4.

No decision made by a department shall be conclusive on any issue in the arbitration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.5.

(a) The Departments of General Services, Transportation, and Water Resources shall jointly adopt and may, from time to time, modify, revise, or repeal uniform regulations to implement this article, which regulations shall be consistent with this article and Article 7.2 (commencing with Section 10245). The regulations may include, but need not be limited to:

(1) The method of initiating arbitration.

(2) The
 place of hearing based upon the convenience of the parties.

(3) Procedures for the selection of a neutral arbitrator.

(4) The form and content of any pleading.

(5) Procedure for conducting hearings.

(6) The providing of experts to assist the arbitrator in the event the assistance is needed.

(7) The content of the award.

(8) Simplified procedures for claims of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or less.

(b) Pending adoption of the initial uniform regulations under this section, the arbitration rules set forth in Subchapter 3 (commencing with Section 301) of Chapter
 2 of Title 1 of the California Code of Regulations, shall govern the conduct of arbitrations under this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 536.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.6.

As used in this article, “claim” means a demand for monetary compensation or damages, arising under or relating to the performance of a contract awarded under this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.7.

As used in this article, “Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee” means the committee created by Article 7.2 (commencing with Section 10245).

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.8.

Unless the parties to the contract otherwise agree, the arbitration decision shall be decided under and in accordance with the law of this state, supported by substantial evidence and, in writing, contain the basis for the decision, findings of fact, and conclusions of law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.9.

A party to the contract may join in the arbitration as a party, any supplier, subcontractor, design professional, surety, or other person who has so agreed and if the joinder is necessary to prevent a substantial risk of the party otherwise being subjected to inconsistent obligations or decisions.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.10.

Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the parties to the contract, after the claim has arisen, from mutually agreeing in writing to waive the provisions of this article and to have the claim litigated in a court of competent jurisdiction.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.11.

Except as provided in this article and in the regulations adopted pursuant to Section 10240.5, the procedure governing the arbitrations shall be as set forth in Title 9 (commencing with Section 1280) of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure. All provisions of Section 1283.05 of the Code of Civil Procedure, except subdivision (e) thereof, apply to the conduct of discovery for any arbitration hereunder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.12.

A party may, within the applicable time periods and upon the grounds specified in this section and in Article 1 (commencing with Section 1285) of Chapter 4 of Title 9 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, petition the court to confirm, correct, or vacate the award rendered by the arbitrator. However, no department may petition to vacate an award without the prior written authorization of its agency secretary. Except where the parties agree not to have the arbitration decision rendered in accordance with the provisions of Section 10240.8, a court shall vacate the award, or part thereof, if it determines either that the award, or part thereof, is not
 supported by substantial evidence or that it is not decided under or in accordance with the laws of this state. If the award, or part thereof, is vacated on the grounds set forth in the preceding sentence or in subdivision (d) or (e) of Section 1286.2 of the Code of Civil Procedure or if the court determines that the award does not include a determination of all submitted questions necessary to determine the controversy, the court may order a rehearing before the original arbitrator or remand to the original arbitrator that portion of the dispute which the court concludes the arbitrator failed to determine.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

10240.13.

The cost of conducting the arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties. The filing fee, witness fees, costs of discovery, or any other cost necessarily incurred by one party shall not be shared by any other party, except that the arbitrator may allow the prevailing party to recover its costs and necessary disbursements, other than attorney’s fees, on the same basis as is allowed in civil actions. These costs shall be taxed as in civil actions.

Interest may be recovered as part of the award as in a civil action. The arbitrator has the same authority as a court in awarding interest and the commencement of
 the arbitration is equivalent to the filing of an action under subdivision (b) of Section 3287 of the Civil Code for the purpose of an award of interest. 

If a party has made an offer of settlement and the award is less favorable than the offer, then the party who has received the offer shall not recover any interest accruing from and after the date on which the offer was made, nor costs of suit.

Reasonable attorney fees may be recovered according to any of the following:

(a) By a party who has made an offer under the circumstances set forth in the preceding sentence but only as to those fees incurred from and after the time of making the offer.

(b) Against a party when substantial evidence establishes that the party has acted frivolously or in bad faith in its demand for, or participation in,
 the arbitration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7.2. Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee [10245. - 10245.4.]

10245.

There is hereby established the Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee, which shall consist of seven members, as follows:

(a) Three public members, who shall be appointed by the Governor, each of whom shall have at least ten years’ experience with a general contracting firm engaged, during that period, in public works construction in California.

(b) The directors of the Departments of General Services, Transportation, and Water Resources shall each appoint a member, who shall be a state officer or employee within their
 respective departments. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the director who appointed the member.

(c) The Director of the Office of Administrative Hearings shall be a nonvoting member of the Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 91.)
-------------------------------------------

10245.1.

Each member appointed by the Governor shall serve for a term of four years, but shall continue in office until the successor to the member is appointed. Each member shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for travel and other expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of the member’s duties.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 91.)
-------------------------------------------

10245.2.

The committee may make recommendations to the departments respecting the arbitration practice and procedure provided by Article 7.1 (commencing with Section 10240). The departments shall consult and confer with the committee respecting the content of the uniform regulations governing the conduct of arbitrations under Article 7.1 (commencing with Section 10240) and shall consider the recommendations in adopting uniform regulations pursuant to Section 10240.5.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 91.)
-------------------------------------------

10245.3.

The committee may establish standards and qualifications for the certification of arbitrators and certify as arbitrators persons meeting such standards and qualifications. The committee may remove persons from its list of certified arbitrators.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 91.)
-------------------------------------------

10245.4.

The Office of Administrative Hearings shall provide administrative services, facilities, and fiscal support to implement this article and Article 7.1 (commencing with Section 10240). The cost thereof shall be recovered through filing fees imposed for each arbitration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 466, Sec. 91.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 8. Modifications; Performance; Payment [10250. - 10265.]

10250.

The department may increase or decrease quantities of work to be done under a unit basis contract during the progress of the work.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10251.

The department may cause the insertion of provisions in any contract for the performance of such extra work and the furnishing of materials therefor by the contractor as the department requires for the proper completion or construction of the whole work contemplated, if the bidders have equal opportunity of knowing the proposed terms for the extra work.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10252.

The director may grant such extensions of time for completion as he deems for the best interests of the state.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10253.

If the director deems that a contractor has failed to supply an adequate working force, or material of proper quality, or has failed to comply with Section 10262, or has failed in any other respect to prosecute the work with the diligence and force specified by the contract, the director may:

(a) After written notice of at least five days to the contractor, specifying the defaults to be remedied, provide any such labor or materials and deduct the cost from any money due or to become due to the contractor under the contract; or 

(b) If he
 considers that the failure is sufficient ground for such action, he may give written notice of at least five days to the contractor and the contractor’s sureties, that if the defaults are not remedied the contractor’s control over the work will be terminated.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10254.

If the defaults are not remedied within the time specified in the notice, the contractor’s control shall terminate as of the expiration of that time.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10255.

Upon such termination, the director may take possession of and use all or any part of the contractor’s materials, tools, equipment, and appliances upon the premises to complete the contract. Thereupon, he may permit the surety to complete or cause the contract work to be completed, or he may direct that all or any part of the work be completed by day’s labor or by employment of other contractors on informal contracts, or both.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10256.

Such informal contracts may be awarded only after a proposal form has been prepared, a copy is served upon the contractor whose control has been terminated, and upon his surety, and three days allowed thereafter so that he may cause others to bid. Any person who is prequalified therefor under Article 4 may bid on informal contracts.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10257.

The provisions of this part, except as to prequalification, are not applicable to the award of informal contracts.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10258.

If the control of a contractor is terminated or he abandons the work, and the work is performed by day’s labor or informal contract as provided in Section 10255, he is not entitled to receive any portion of the amount to be paid under the contract until it is fully completed. After completion, if the unpaid balance exceeds the sum of the amount expended by the state in finishing the work, plus all damages sustained or to be sustained by the state, the excess not otherwise required by law to be retained shall be paid to the contractor, but if such sum exceeds the unpaid balance, the contractor and his surety are liable to the state for the excess. If the surety completes the
 contract work, as provided in Section 10255, such surety shall be subrogated to money due under the contract and to money which shall become due in the course of completion by the surety, to the extent provided by law.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10259.

On the completion of the contract, the original contractor is entitled to the return of all his unused materials, and his equipment, tools, and appliances, except that he shall have no claim on account of usual and ordinary depreciation, loss, and wear and tear.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10260.

The notices required by this article may be served on the contractor or on his agent having charge of the work, personally, or by registered mail addressed to the contractor or his agent, or, if neither can be located or their addresses are unknown, by posting in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the project.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10261.

(a) Payments upon contracts shall be made as the department prescribes upon estimates made and approved by the department, but progress payments shall not be made in excess of 100 percent of the percentage of actual work completed plus a like percentage of the value of material delivered on the ground or stored subject to or under the control of the state, and unused, except as otherwise provided in this section. The department shall withhold not more than 5 percent of the contract price until final completion and acceptance of the project. However, at any time after 95 percent of the work has been completed, the department may reduce the funds withheld to an amount not less than 125 percent of the estimated value of the work yet to be completed, as determined by the department, if the reduction has been approved, in writing, by
 the surety on the performance bond and by the surety on the payment bond. The Controller shall draw their warrants upon estimates so made and approved by the department and the Treasurer shall pay them. The funds may be released by electronic transfer if that procedure is requested by the contractor, in writing, and if the department has, in place at the time of the request, the mechanism for the transfer.

(b) (1) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), when the director of the department has made a finding prior to the bid that a specified project is substantially complex and therefore requires a higher retention amount than 5 percent, and the department includes in the bid documents details explaining the basis for the finding
 and the actual retention amount, then payments upon contracts by the department shall be made as the department prescribes upon estimates made and approved by the department. However, progress payments shall not be made in excess of 95 percent of the percentage of actual work completed, plus a like percentage of the value of material delivered on the ground or stored, subject to, or under the control of the state, and unused, except as otherwise provided in this section. At any time after 95 percent of the work has been completed, the department may reduce the funds withheld to an amount not less than 125 percent of the estimated value of the work yet to be completed, as determined by the department, if the reduction has been approved, in writing, by the surety on the performance bond and by the surety on the payment bond. The Controller shall draw
 their warrants upon estimates so made and approved by the department and the Treasurer shall pay them with funds appropriated therefor. The funds may be released by electronic transfer if that procedure is requested by the contractor, in writing, and if the department has, in place at the time of the request, the mechanism for the transfer.

(2) Any finding by the director of a department that a project is substantially complex shall include a description of the specific project and why it is a unique project that is not regularly, customarily, or routinely performed by the agency or licensed contractors.

(History: Amended (as amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 37, Sec. 2) by Stats. 2022, Ch. 121, Sec. 2.   (AB 2173)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10261.5.

(a) Any state agency which fails to make any progress payment within 30 days after receipt of the payment request from a contractor on a construction contract for an undisputed payment request, which was properly submitted by the contractor to the agency, shall pay interest to the contractor equivalent to the legal rate set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Any state agency which independently calculates the amount due on a progress payment and which fails to make a progress payment within 30 days of the first submittal of the estimate for each contract by the engineer, shall pay interest to
 the contractor equivalent to the legal rate set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In the event that the payment is not made within 30 days of receipt of the contractor’s request or the first submittal by the engineer, and the Controller has processed the payment within 14 days of receipt of the request or submittal, the contracting state agency shall pay interest to the contractor equivalent to the legal rate set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In the event that the payment is not made within 30 days of receipt of the contractor’s request or the first submittal by the engineer, and the contracting state agency has processed the payment within 16 days after receipt of the request or submittal, the Controller shall pay interest as provided in Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

For purposes of this section, a payment request shall be considered properly executed if funds
 are available for payment of the payment request, and payment is not delayed due to an audit inquiry by the Controller.

(b) Upon receipt of a payment request, each agency shall require:

(1) That each payment request be reviewed as soon as practicable after receipt for the purpose of determining that a payment request is a proper payment request.

(2) Any payment request determined not to be a proper payment request suitable for payment shall be returned as soon as practicable, but not later than seven days, after receipt, specifying the reasons that the payment request is not a proper payment request.

(3) The number of days available to a state agency to make a timely payment of payment request without incurring interest shall be reduced by the number of
 days by which an agency exceeds the requirements of paragraph (2).

(History: Added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1253, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10261.7.

(a) Within 10 days of making a construction contract payment, a state agency that maintains an Internet Web site shall post on its Internet Web site the following:

(1) The project for which the payment was made.

(2) The name of the construction contractor or company paid.

(3) The date the payment was
 made or the date the state agency transmitted instructions to the Controller or other payer to make the payment.

(4) The payment application number or other identifying information.

(5) The amount of the payment.

(b) This section shall not apply to a construction contract valued below twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(c) This section shall not apply to progress payments published under Section 10262.3.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 585, Sec. 1.   (AB 1223)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

10262.

The contractor shall pay to his or her subcontractors, within seven days of receipt of each progress payment, the respective amounts allowed the contractor on account of the work performed by his or her subcontractors, to the extent of each subcontractor’s interest therein. The payments to subcontractors shall be based on estimates made pursuant to Section 10261. Any diversion by the contractor of payments received for prosecution of a contract, or failure to reasonably account for the application or use of the payments constitutes ground for actions prescribed in Section 10253, in addition to disciplinary action by the Contractors’ State License Board. The subcontractor shall notify, in writing, the Contractors’ State License Board and the department of any payment
 less than the amount or percentage approved for the class or item of work as set forth in Section 10261.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 700, Sec. 8.   (SB 293)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10262.3.

To facilitate enforcement of Section 10262, the Department of General Services shall publish in the California State Contracts Register notice of progress payments made to prime contractors.

(History: Added by Stats. 1991, Ch. 374, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10262.5.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, a prime contractor or subcontractor shall pay to any subcontractor, not later than seven days after receipt of each progress payment, the respective amounts allowed the contractor on account of the work performed by the subcontractors, to the extent of each subcontractor’s interest therein. In the event that there is a good faith dispute over all or any portion of the amount due on a progress payment from the prime contractor or subcontractor to a subcontractor, then the prime contractor or subcontractor may withhold no more than 150 percent of the disputed amount.

Any contractor who violates this section shall pay to the subcontractor a penalty of 2 percent of the amount due per month for every month that
 payment is not made. In any action for the collection of funds wrongfully withheld, the prevailing party shall be entitled to his or her attorney’s fees and costs.

(b) This section shall not be construed to limit or impair any contractual, administrative, or judicial remedies otherwise available to a contractor or a subcontractor in the event of a dispute involving late payment or nonpayment by a contractor or deficient subcontract performance or nonperformance by a subcontractor.

(c) On or before September 1 of each year, the head of each state agency shall submit to the Legislature a report on the number and dollar volume of written complaints received from subcontractors and prime contractors on contracts in excess of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000), relating to violations of this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 700, Sec. 9.   (SB 293)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10263.

(a) Provisions shall be included in any invitation for bid and in any contract documents to permit the substitution of securities for any moneys withheld by a public agency to ensure performance under a contract. At the request and expense of the contractor, securities equivalent to the amount withheld shall be deposited with the State Treasurer or, a state or federally chartered bank in this state, as the escrow agent, who shall then pay the moneys to the contractor. Upon satisfactory completion of the contract, the securities shall be returned to the contractor.

(b) Alternatively, the contractor may request and the owner shall make payment of retentions earned directly to the escrow agent. The contractor may direct the
 investment of the payments into securities and the contractor shall receive the interest earned on the investments upon the same terms provided for in this section for securities deposited by the contractor. Upon satisfactory completion of the contract, the contractor shall receive from the escrow agent all securities, interest, and payments received by the escrow agent from the owner, pursuant to the terms of this section.

(c) Alternatively, and subject to the approval and at the sole discretion of the public agency, the payment of retentions earned may be deposited directly with a person licensed under Division 6 (commencing with Section 17000) of the Financial Code as the escrow agent. Upon written request of an escrow agent who has not been approved by the public agency under this subdivision, the public agency shall provide written notice to that escrow agent within 10 business days of receipt of the request indicating the reason or
 reasons for not approving that escrow agent. An escrow agent that has been disapproved by the public agency may not maintain any cause of action of any nature against the state or any public agency, officer, agent, or employee of any public agency, in connection with the disapproval of that escrow agent. The payments shall be deposited in a trust account with a federally chartered bank or savings association within 24 hours of receipt by the escrow agent. The contractor shall not place any retentions with the escrow agent in excess of the coverage provided to that escrow agent pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 17314 of the Financial Code. In all respects not inconsistent with this subdivision, the remaining provisions of this section shall apply to escrow agents acting pursuant to this subdivision. In addition, an escrow agent subject to this subdivision shall maintain insurance to cover negligent acts and omissions of the escrow agent in connection with the handling of retentions under this section in
 an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per contract, executed by an admitted insurer and in a form satisfactory to the public agency.

(d) Securities eligible for investment under this section shall include those listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code, bank or savings and loan certificates of deposit, interest-bearing demand deposit accounts, standby letters of credit, or any other security mutually agreed to by the contractor and the public agency.

The contractor shall be the beneficial owner of any securities substituted for moneys withheld and shall receive any interest thereon.

Failure to include the provisions prescribed by this section in bid and contract documents shall void any provisions for performance retentions in a public agency contract.

(e) (1) Any contractor who elects to receive interest on moneys withheld in retention by a public agency shall, at the request of any subcontractor, make that option available to the subcontractor regarding any moneys withheld in retention by the contractor from the subcontractor. If the contractor elects to receive interest on any moneys withheld in retention by a public agency, then the subcontractor shall receive the identical rate of interest received by the contractor on any retention moneys withheld from the subcontractor by the contractor, less any actual pro rata costs associated with administering and calculating that interest. In the event that the interest rate is a fluctuating rate, the rate for the subcontractor shall be determined by calculating the interest rate paid during the time that retentions were withheld from the subcontractor. If the contractor elects to substitute securities in lieu of retention, then, by mutual consent of the contractor and subcontractor, the subcontractor
 may substitute securities in exchange for the release of moneys held in retention by the contractor.

(2) This subdivision shall apply only to those subcontractors performing more than 5 percent of the contractor’s total bid.

(3) A contractor shall not require any subcontractor to waive any provision of this section.

(f) The Legislature hereby finds and declares that the provisions of this section are of statewide
 concern and are necessary to encourage full participation by contractors and subcontractors in public contract procedures.

(g) An escrow agreement used pursuant to this section shall be null, void, and unenforceable unless it is substantially similar to the following form:ESCROW AGREEMENT FOR
 SECURITY DEPOSITS IN LIEU OF RETENTIONThis Escrow Agreement is made and entered into by and be­tween

whose address is
 hereinafter called “owner,”
 whose address is
 hereinafter called “contractor,” and
 whose address is
 hereinafter called “escrow agent.”For the consideration hereinafter set forth, the owner, contractor, and escrow agent agree as follows:

(1) Pursuant to Section 10263 of the Public Contract Code of the State of California, the contractor has the option to deposit securities with the escrow agent as a substitute for retention
 earnings required to be withheld by the owner pursuant to the construction contract entered into between the owner and contractor for ____ in the amount of ____ dated ____ (hereafter referred to as the “contract”). Alternatively, on written request of the contractor, the owner shall make payments of the retention earnings directly to the escrow agent. When the contractor deposits the securities as a substitute for the contract earnings, the escrow agent shall notify the owner within 10 days of the deposit. The market value of the securities at the time of the substitution shall be at least equal to the cash amount then required to be withheld as retention under the terms of the contract between the owner and contractor. Securities shall be held in the name of the ____, and shall designate the contractor as the beneficial owner.

(2) The owner shall make progress payments to the contractor for those funds which otherwise would be withheld from
 progress payments pursuant to the contract provision, provided that the escrow agent holds securities in the form and amount specified above.

(3) When the owner makes payment of retentions earned directly to the escrow agent, the escrow agent shall hold them for the benefit of the contractor until such time as the escrow created under this contract is terminated. The contractor may direct the investment of the payments into securities. All terms and conditions of this agreement and the rights and responsibilities of the parties shall be equally applicable and binding when the owner pays the escrow agent directly.

(4) The contractor shall be responsible for paying all fees for the expenses incurred by the escrow agent in administering the escrow account. These expenses and payment terms shall be determined by the contractor and escrow agent.

(5) The interest earned on the securities or the money market accounts held in escrow and all interest earned on the interest shall be for the sole account of contractor and shall be subject to withdrawal by contractor at any time and from time to time without notice to the owner.

(6) The contractor shall have the right to withdraw all or any part of the principal in the escrow account only by written notice to the escrow agent accompanied by written authorization from the owner to the escrow agent that the owner consents to the withdrawal of the amount sought to be withdrawn by contractor.

(7) The owner shall have a right to draw upon the securities in the event of default by the contractor. Upon seven days’ written notice to the escrow agent from the owner of the default, the escrow agent shall immediately convert the
 securities to cash and shall distribute the cash as instructed by the owner.

(8) Upon receipt of written notification from the owner certifying that the contract is final and complete, and that the contractor has complied with all requirements and procedures applicable to the contract, the escrow agent shall release to the contractor all securities and interest on deposit less escrow fees and charges of the escrow account. The escrow shall be closed immediately upon disbursement of all moneys and securities on deposit and payments of fees and charges.

(9) The escrow agent shall rely on the written notifications from the owner and the contractor pursuant to Sections (1) to (8), inclusive, of this agreement and the owner and contractor shall hold the escrow agent harmless from the escrow agent’s release, conversion, and disbursement of the securities and interest as set forth
 above.

(10) The names of the persons who are authorized to give written notice or to receive written notice on behalf of the owner and on behalf of the contractor in connection with the foregoing, and exemplars of their respective signatures are as follows:On behalf of the owner:On behalf of the contractor:
 Title
 Title
 Name
 Name
 Signature
 Signature
 Address
 Address

 On behalf of the escrow agent:
 Title
 Name
 Signature
 Address
At the time the escrow account is opened, the owner and contractor shall deliver to the escrow agent a fully executed counterpart of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement by their proper officers on the date first set forth above.
 Owner
 Contractor

 Title
 Title
 Name
 Name
 Signature
 Signature(h) For purposes of this section, “contractor” includes, but is not limited to, a contractor performing a public works contract as defined in Section 1101 as well as any person or entity who would qualify as a contractor under Section 6106.5.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 93, Sec. 1.   (SB 1192)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10264.

(a) With the exception of projects over water requiring marine access, and which have a contract amount greater than twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), in addition to the provisions for partial payment made in Section 10261, the department may make partial payments for the mobilization costs of a contract subject to this chapter, not to exceed the following:

(1) When 5 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 50 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 5
 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(2) When 10 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 75 percent of the amount bid for mobilization or 7.5 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(3) When 20 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 95 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 9.5 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(4) When 50 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 100 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 10 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(5) Upon completion of all work on the project, payment of any amount bid for mobilization in excess of 10
 percent of the original contract amount will be paid.

(b) For projects over water requiring marine access, and with a contract amount greater than twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), in addition to the provisions for partial payment made in Section 10261, the department may make partial payments for the mobilization costs of a contract subject to this chapter, not to exceed the following:

(1) When 1 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 50 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 1 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(2) When 2.5 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 60 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 2.5 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(3) When 5 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 75 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 5 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(4) When 15 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 95 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 10 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(5) When 40 percent of the original contract amount is earned, 100 percent of the amount bid for mobilization, or 15 percent of the original contract amount, whichever is lesser, may be paid.

(6) Upon completion of all work on the project, payment of any amount bid for mobilization in excess of 15 percent of the original contract amount shall be paid.

This subdivision shall apply only to contracts that are advertised subsequent to the date that the act adding this subdivision becomes effective.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 965, Sec. 2.   Effective September 27, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------

10265.

A claim pursuant to Part 3 (commencing with Section 900) of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code is not required, but legal action on any claim shall be commenced within the time period specified in Section 10240.1. The department may compromise or otherwise settle any claims arising from the contract at any time.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 438, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 9. Offenses [10280. - 10284.]

10280.

Any officer or employee of the department who corruptly performs any official act to the injury of the state, is guilty of a felony.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10281.

Any contractor or his agent or employee who corruptly permits the violation of any contract awarded under this part to the injury of the state, is guilty of a felony.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10282.

Any subcontractor or agent or employee of any contractor or subcontractor, who has knowledge of any work being done in violation of any contract under this part and does not immediately notify the department or the inspector or resident engineer upon the project of the violation, is guilty of a felony.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------

10283.

Such felonies are punishable by imprisonment pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170 of the Penal Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 15, Sec. 555.   (AB 109)   Effective April 4, 2011.   Operative October 1, 2011, by Sec. 636 of Ch. 15, as amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 39, Sec. 68.)
-------------------------------------------

10284.

Such persons are also liable to the state for double the amount the state may have lost, or be liable to lose by reason of the acts made crimes by this article.

(History: Enacted by Stats. 1981, Ch. 306.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 10. Ineligibility to Contract [10285. - 10285.5.]

10285.

The term “person,” as used in this article, means any individual, partnership, joint venture, or association or any other organization or any combination thereof.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 376, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10285.1.

Any state agency may suspend, for a period of up to three years from the date of conviction, any person from bidding upon, or being awarded, a public works or services contract with the agency under this part or from being a subcontractor at any tier upon the contract, if that person, or any partner, member, officer, director, responsible managing officer, or responsible managing employee thereof, has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of any charge of fraud, bribery, collusion, conspiracy, or any other act in violation of any state or federal antitrust law in connection with the bidding upon, award of, or performance of, any public works
 contract, as defined in Section 1101, with any public entity, as defined in Section 1100, including, for the purposes of this article, the Regents of the University of California or the Trustees of the California State University. A state agency may determine the eligibility of any person to enter into a contract under this article by requiring the person to submit a statement under penalty of perjury declaring that neither the person nor any subcontractor to be engaged by the person has been convicted of any of the offenses referred to in this section within the preceding three years.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 376, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10285.2.

Before suspending any person under this article, the state agency shall provide a hearing upon reasonable notice. In determining whether to suspend, and the duration of any suspension, the state agency shall consider, in addition to any other relevant factors, both of the following:

(a) The degree to which the person cooperated with the state or federal authorities in the criminal proceeding.

(b) The degree to which the person has agreed to restitution for any damages incurred by the public entity as a result of the acts upon
 which the conviction was based.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 376, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10285.3.

In the event that any state agency has suspended any person under this article, any other state agency shall adopt the terms of that suspension without further notice or hearing.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 376, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10285.4.

In the event that any state agency has suspended any person under this article, that agency may terminate the suspension if it determines that termination is in the best interest of the agency. In the event of termination, any suspension by adoption pursuant to Section 10285.3 also shall be terminated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 376, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10285.5.

Nothing in this article shall require any state agency to contract with, or to permit the employment of a person as a subcontractor, or any person on any project funded in whole or part by federal funds, if the person has been suspended or debarred by the federal agency providing the funds.

(History: Added by Stats. 1985, Ch. 376, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 1.5. California Taxpayer and Shareholder Protection Act of 2003 [10286. - 10286.1.]

10286.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the California Taxpayer and Shareholder Protection Act of 2003.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 657, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10286.1.

(a) For purposes of this part, except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (b) and (c), a state agency shall not enter into any contract with an expatriate corporation or its subsidiaries.

(b) (1) For purposes of this chapter, an “expatriate corporation” means a foreign incorporated entity that is publicly traded in the United States to which all of the following apply:

(A) The United States is the principal market for the public trading of the foreign incorporated entity.

(B) The foreign incorporated entity has no substantial
 business activities in the place of incorporation.

(C) Either clause (i) or clause (ii) applies:

(i) The foreign entity was established in connection with a transaction or series of related transactions pursuant to which (I) the foreign entity directly or indirectly acquired substantially all of the properties held by a domestic corporation or all of the properties constituting a trade or business of a domestic partnership or related foreign partnership, and (II) immediately after the acquisition, more than 50 percent of the publicly traded stock, by vote or value, of the foreign entity is held by former shareholders of the domestic corporation or by former partners of the domestic partnership or related foreign partnership. For purposes of subclause (II), any stock sold in a public offering related to the transaction or a series of transactions is disregarded.

(ii) The foreign entity was established in connection with a transaction or series of related transactions pursuant to which (I) the foreign entity directly or indirectly acquired substantially all of the properties held by a domestic corporation or all of the properties constituting a trade or business of a domestic partnership or related foreign partnership, and (II) the acquiring foreign entity is more than 50 percent owned, by vote or value, by domestic shareholders or partners.

(iii) For purposes of this subparagraph, indirect acquisition of property includes the acquisition of a stock share, or any portion thereof, of the owner of that property.

(2) For purposes of this chapter, neither of the following are an “expatriate corporation”:

(A) A foreign
 incorporated entity that is publicly traded in the United States if all of the following are true:

(i) The foreign incorporated entity, or any predecessor entity, was originally established in connection with a transaction or series of related transactions between unrelated publicly traded corporations.

(ii) Immediately after the transaction or series of related transactions, not more than 70 percent of the publicly traded stock, by vote or value, of the foreign incorporated entity is held in the manner described in clause (i) of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1).

(iii) The transaction or series of related transactions that originally established the foreign incorporated entity, or any predecessor entity, was a taxable transaction for any United States shareholders of any domestic corporation that was a party to such
 transaction.

(iv) The foreign incorporated entity is both of the following:

(I) Created or organized under the laws of a foreign country with which the United States has a comprehensive income tax treaty.

(II) Considered a resident of that foreign country for purposes of that treaty, or any successor treaty with that foreign country meeting the requirements of this paragraph.

(B) Any successor corporation that meets the requirements of clause (iv) of subparagraph (A) that is a successor corporation resulting from a corporate reorganization as defined in Section 368 of the Internal Revenue Code or from a transaction satisfying the requirements of Section 351 of the Internal Revenue Code.

(3) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a state agency may contract with an expatriate corporation, or its subsidiary, if it was an expatriate corporation before January 1, 2004, to which both of the following apply:

(A) The foreign entity provides, by operation of law, by provisions of its governing documents, by resolution of its board of directors, or in any other manner, at least the following shareholders’ rights:

(i) Shareholders of the entity have the right to inspect, at a principal place of business in the United States, copies of the entity’s books and records, including, but not limited to, shareholder names, addresses, and shareholdings in accordance with the corporation law, as amended from time to time and as that law is interpreted by the courts, of the United States jurisdiction in which the entity was previously incorporated, or, if the entity was not
 previously incorporated, in accordance with the terms set forth in the Model Business Corporation Act, as that act may be amended from time to time, provided that, if the corporate law of the United States jurisdiction in which the entity was previously incorporated or the Model Business Corporation Act does not provide access to the shareholder names, addresses, and shareholdings, these books and records are available for inspection by shareholders for purposes properly related to their status as shareholders of the entity.

(ii) The entity permits its shareholders to bring derivative proceedings on behalf of the entity, provided that these derivative proceedings are brought on a basis and under the terms applicable under the law, as amended from time to time and as interpreted by, or required by, the courts of the United States jurisdiction in which the entity was previously incorporated, or, if the entity was not previously incorporated, on a
 basis and under the terms set forth in the Model Business Corporations Act as that act may be amended from time to time and as it is interpreted by, or required by, the courts.

(iii) Entity transactions in which any director is interested are approved in accordance with the applicable law, as amended from time to time and as interpreted by the courts, of the United States jurisdiction in which the entity was previously incorporated, or, if the entity was not previously incorporated, in accordance with the terms set forth in the Model Business Corporations Act, as may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the courts.

(iv) The entity has consented to the jurisdiction, for any otherwise available cause of action by or on behalf of the entity’s shareholders, including any pendent state causes of action, of all of the following courts:

(I) The state courts of one or more states.

(II) The United States federal courts in any state in which the entity consents to the jurisdiction of that state’s courts pursuant to subclause (I).

(v) The entity has appointed an agent for service of process in the state or states in which the entity has consented to jurisdiction, as described in clause (iv), and the entity meets at least one of the following conditions:

(I) The entity has unencumbered assets in the United States, which assets may include equity or debt investments in United States companies, with a book value in excess of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), and the entity delivers to the Secretary of State an opinion of an attorney licensed in the United States that judgments rendered
 against the entity may be satisfied by using these assets.

(II) The entity posts a bond or similar security in an amount of at least fifty million dollars ($50,000,000).

(III) The entity has directors’ and officers’ insurance in an amount of at least fifty million dollars ($50,000,000).

(vi) The entity agrees that, in connection with any lawsuit brought against it by its shareholders in any court in which the entity has consented to jurisdiction as described in clause (iv), the entity will provide to the court notice of the manner in which the entity complied with clause (v) and, if the entity complied with that clause in the manner specified in subclause (I) of clause (v), a copy of the opinion described in that subclause.

(vii) Shareholder approval is
 required for any sale of all or substantially all of the entity’s assets in accordance with the law, as amended from time to time and as it is interpreted by the courts, of the United States jurisdiction in which it was previously incorporated, or, if it was not previously incorporated, in accordance with the terms set forth in the Model Business Corporations Act, as it may be amended from time to time.

(viii) The directors and officers of the entity occupy a fiduciary relationship with the entity and its shareholders and these directors and officers, in performing their duties, act in good faith in a manner that a director or officer believes to be in the best interests of the entity and its shareholders, as that standard of care is interpreted by the courts.

(ix) The entity agrees to hold no more than one of every four annual shareholder meetings in a location outside the United
 States and, in the event that the entity holds an annual meeting outside the United States, the entity agrees to provide access to that meeting through a Web cast or other technology that allows the entity’s shareholders to do both of the following:

(I) Listen to the meeting, watch the meeting, or both.

(II) Send questions that will be addressed at the meeting.

(x) The entity provides a description of the shareholder rights described in clauses (i) to (ix), inclusive, and any subsequent changes to these rights, on the entity’s Web site or in its 10K filings with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.

(B) The entity uses worldwide combined reporting to calculate the income on which it pays taxes to the state.

(c) The chief executive officer of a state agency or his or her designee may waive the prohibition specified in subdivision (a) if the executive officer or his or her designee has made a written finding that the contract is necessary to meet a compelling public interest. For purposes of this section, a “compelling public interest” includes, but is not limited to, ensuring the provision of essential services, ensuring the public health and safety, or an emergency as defined in Section 1102. If a waiver is granted to a vendor pursuant to this subdivision, the requirement to submit a declaration of compliance, as set forth in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d), does not apply to that vendor.

(d) (1) For purposes of this chapter, “state agency” means every state office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, and the California State University, but does not
 include the University of California, the Legislature, the courts, or any agency in the judicial branch of government.

(2) On or after January 1, 2004, all state agencies shall, as a condition of the contract, require any vendor that is offered a contract to do business with the state to submit a declaration stating that the vendor is eligible to contract with the state pursuant to this section.

(3) A vendor that declares as true any material matter in a declaration described in this subdivision that he or she knows to be false is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(e) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) and subdivision (f), this section applies to contracts that are entered into on or after January 1, 2004.

(2) With respect to an entity
 that was an expatriate corporation, as defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b), before January 1, 2004, this section applies to contracts that are entered into on or after April 1, 2004.

(f) (1) The declaration requirement set forth in subdivision (d) does not apply to a credit card purchase of goods of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or less.

(2) The total amount of exemption authorized herein shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) per year for each company from which a state agency is purchasing goods by credit card. It shall be the responsibility of each state agency to monitor the use of this exemption and adhere to these restrictions on these purchases.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 349, Sec. 2.   (AB 759)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2. State Acquisition of Goods and Services [10290. - 10490.]



  ARTICLE 1. Definitions [10290. - 10290.3.]

10290.

As used in this chapter:

(a) “Department” means the Department of General Services.

(b) “Director” means the Director of General Services.

(c) “Centralized purchasing” means the purchase for state agencies of materials, supplies, and equipment by the Office of Procurement.

(d) “Goods” means all types of tangible personal property, including materials, supplies, and equipment.

(e) “Office” means the Office of Procurement in the Department of General Services.

(f) “Price schedule” means an agreement between the Office of Procurement and a supplier under which the supplier agrees to accept orders from the office or a state agency for specified goods at set prices for a specified period of time but which does not obligate the office or state agencies to contract for the specified goods from the supplier.

(g) “Regional contract” means a contract of the same type as a statewide contract but applicable only to specified contracting in a particular area or region of the state.

(h) “Statewide contract” means a contract awarded by the Office of Procurement to one or more suppliers for the acquisition of specified goods for a period of time, at a price, and in an amount set forth in the contract.

(i) “Multiple award” means a contract of indefinite quantity for one or more similar goods, information technology, or services to more than one supplier.

(j) “Multiple award schedule” (MAS) is an agreement established between the General Services Administration of the United States and certain suppliers to do business under specific prices, terms, and conditions for specified goods, information technology, or services.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 918, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10290.1.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in exercising their delegation of contracting authority from the department, state agencies may contract for goods, information technology, or services with suppliers who have multiple award schedules with the General Services Administration of the United States if the supplier is willing to extend those terms, conditions, and prices. The department may also develop multiple award schedules or agreements for use by state agencies in the same manner.

(b) The department shall determine the delegation contracting authority for agencies wishing to contract with suppliers who have multiple award schedules. The department shall seek input from both customer departments and agencies and private sector suppliers.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 918, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10290.3.

(a) Notwithstanding the bidding provisions of this chapter, reverse auctions may be utilized for the acquisition of goods and services. The reverse auction process shall include a specification of an opening date and time when real-time electronic bids may be accepted, and provide that the procedure shall remain open until the designated closing date and time.

(b) All bids on reverse auctions shall be posted electronically on the Internet, updated on a real-time basis, and shall allow registered bidders to lower the price of their bid below the lowest bid posted on the Internet.

(c) The Department of General Services shall require vendors to register before the reverse auction opening date and time, and as part of the registration, agree to any terms and conditions and other requirements of the solicitation. The Department of General Services may require vendors to be prequalified prior to placing bids in a reverse auction.

(d) For purposes of this section, “reverse auction” means a competitive online solicitation process for fungible goods or services in which vendors compete against each other online in real time in an open and interactive environment.

(e) The reverse auction process may not be used for bidding on any construction contract that is subject to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 10100).

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 266, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Approval of Contracts [10295. - 10299.5.]

10295.

(a) All contracts entered into by any state agency for (1) the acquisition of goods or elementary school textbooks, (2) services, whether or not the services involve the furnishing or use of goods or are performed by an independent contractor, (3) the construction, alteration, improvement, repair, or maintenance of property, real or personal, or (4) the performance of work or services by the state agency for or in cooperation with any person, or public body, are void unless and until approved by the department. Every contract shall be transmitted with all papers, estimates, and recommendations concerning it to the department and, if approved by the department, shall be effective from the date of the approval.

(b) This section applies to a state agency that by
 general or specific statute is expressly or impliedly authorized to enter into transactions referred to in this section.

(c) This section does not apply to any of the following:

(1) A transaction entered into by the Trustees of the California State University, by the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges, or by a department under the State Contract Act or the California State University Contract Law.

(2) A contract of a type specifically mentioned and authorized to be entered into by the Department of Transportation under Section 14035 or 14035.5 of the Government Code, Sections 99316 to 99319, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code, or the Streets and Highways Code.

(3) A contract entered into by the Department of Transportation that
 is not funded by money derived by state tax sources but, rather, is funded by money derived from federal or local tax sources.

(4) A contract entered into by the Department of Human Resources for state employee benefits, occupational health and safety, training services, or combination thereof.

(5) A contract let by the Legislature.

(6) A contract entered into under the authority of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 11770) of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Insurance Code.

(7) A contract entered into by the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection for the purpose of providing logistical support for large-scale prescribed fire operations, including, but not limited to, meals, lodging, hired equipment, onsite preparatory efforts, and land use agreements,
 or any related subcontract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 778, Sec. 2.   (SB 1101)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.1.

(a) A state department or agency shall not contract for the purchase of tangible personal property from a vendor, contractor, or an affiliate of a vendor or contractor, unless that vendor, contractor, and all of its affiliates that make sales for delivery into California are holders of a California seller’s permit issued pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 6066) of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or are holders of a certificate of registration issued pursuant to Section 6226 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. A vendor or contractor that sells tangible personal property to a state department or agency, and each affiliate of that vendor or contractor that makes sales for delivery into California, shall be regarded as a “retailer engaged in business in this state,” and shall be required to collect the California sales or use tax on all its sales into the state in accordance with Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

(b) Beginning on and after January 1, 2004, each vendor, contractor, or affiliate of a vendor or contractor that is offered a contract to do business with a state department or state agency shall submit to that state department or agency a copy, as applicable, of that retailer’s seller’s permit or certificate of registration, and a copy of each of the retailer’s applicable affiliate’s seller’s permit or certificate of registration, as described in subdivision (a). This subdivision does not apply to a credit card purchase of goods of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or less. The total amount of exemption authorized herein shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) per year for each company from which a state agency is purchasing goods by credit card. It shall be the responsibility of each state agency to monitor the use of this exemption and adhere to these restrictions on these purchases.

(c) A state department or state agency is exempted from the provisions of subdivision (a) if the executive director of that state department or agency, or his or her designee, makes a written finding that the contract is necessary to meet a compelling state interest.

(d) For the purposes of this section:

(1) “Affiliate of the vendor or contractor” means any person or entity that is controlled by, or is under common control of, a vendor or contractor through stock ownership or any other affiliation.

(2) “Compelling state interest” includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following:

(A) Ensuring the provision of essential services.

(B) Ensuring the public health, safety, and welfare.

(C) Responding to an emergency, as defined in Section 1102.

(3) “State department or agency” means every state office, department, division, bureau, board, and commission, but does not include the University of California, the California State University, the Legislature, the courts, and any agency in the judicial branch of government.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 453, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.2.

(a) No vehicle acquisition request, vehicle purchase order, or new contract shall be approved by the Department of General Services for the purchase of new vehicles that would result in the expenditure of funds unless a certification is received in writing and signed by the secretary or director of an agency or a department, respectively, or his or her designee, that has requested the acquisition of the new vehicles, verifying that the purchase is vital and mission critical for the agency or department.

(b) The certification shall include the date, title, and the signature of the person authorizing the purchase.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 296, Sec. 250.   (AB 1023)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.3.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no state agency may enter into any contract for the acquisition of goods or services in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more with a contractor who, in the provision of benefits, discriminates between employees with spouses and employees with domestic partners, or discriminates between employees with spouses or domestic partners
 of a different sex and employees with spouses or domestic partners of the same sex, or discriminates between same-sex and different-sex domestic partners of employees or between same-sex and different-sex spouses of employees.

(2) For purposes of this section, “contract” includes contracts with a cumulative amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more per contractor in each fiscal year.

(3) For purposes of this section, “domestic partner” means one of two persons who has filed a declaration of domestic partnership with the Secretary of State pursuant to Division 2.5 (commencing with Section 297) of the Family Code.

(4) (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), this section does not apply to any contracts executed or amended prior to January 1, 2007, or to bid
 packages advertised and made available to the public, or any competitive or sealed bids received by the state, prior to January 1, 2007, unless and until those contracts or property contracts are amended after December 31, 2006, and would otherwise be subject to this section.

(B) If a duration of a contract executed or amended prior to January 1, 2007, is for more than one year going beyond January 1, 2008, this section shall apply to the contract on January 1, 2008.

(5) The requirements of this section shall apply only to those portions of a contractor’s operations that occur under any of the following conditions:

(A) Within the state.

(B) On real property outside the state if the property is owned by the state or if the state has a right to occupy the
 property, and if the contractor’s presence at that location is connected to a contract with the state.

(C) Elsewhere in the United States where work related to a state contract is being performed.

(b) Contractors shall treat as confidential to the maximum extent allowed by law or by the requirement of the contractor’s insurance provider, any request by an employee or applicant for employment for domestic partner or spousal benefits or any documentation of eligibility for domestic partner or spousal benefits submitted by an employee or applicant for employment.

(c) After taking all reasonable measures to find a contractor that complies with this section, as determined by the state agency, the requirements of
 this section may be waived under any of the following circumstances:

(1) Whenever there is only one prospective contractor willing to enter into a specific contract with the state agency.

(2) If the contract is necessary to respond to an emergency, as determined by the state agency, that endangers the public health, welfare, or safety, or the contract is necessary for the provision of essential services, and no entity that complies with the requirements of this section capable of responding to the emergency is immediately available.

(3) Where the requirements of this section violate, or are inconsistent with, the terms or conditions of a grant, subvention, or agreement, provided that a good faith attempt has been made by the agency to change the terms or conditions of any grant, subvention, or agreement to authorize
 application of this section.

(4) Where the contractor is providing wholesale or bulk water, power, or natural gas, the conveyance or transmission of the same, or ancillary services, as required for assuring reliable services in accordance with good utility practice, provided that the purchase of the same may not practically be accomplished through the standard competitive bidding procedures, and further provided that this exemption does not apply to contractors providing direct retail services to end users.

(d) (1) If there is a difference in the cost to provide a certain benefit to a domestic partner or spouse, the contractor is not deemed to be in violation of this section so long as the
 contractor permits the employee to pay any excess costs.

(2) The contractor is not deemed to discriminate in the provision of benefits if the contractor, in providing the benefits, pays the actual costs incurred in obtaining the benefit.

(3) In the event a contractor is unable to provide a certain benefit, despite taking reasonable measures to do so, the contractor may not be deemed to discriminate in the provision of benefits.

(4) For any contracts executed or amended on or after July 1, 2004, and prior to January 1, 2007, and to bid packages advertised and made available to the public, or any competitive or sealed bids received by the state, on or after July 1, 2004, and prior to January 1, 2007, unless and until those contracts or bid packages are amended after June 30, 2004, but prior to
 January 1, 2007, and would otherwise be subject to this section, a contractor may require an employee to pay the costs of providing additional benefits that are offered to comply with this section if an employee elects to have the additional benefits. This paragraph shall not be construed to permit a contractor to require an employee to cover the costs of providing any benefits, which have otherwise been provided to all employees regardless of marital or domestic partner status.

(e) A contractor is not deemed to be in violation of this section if the contractor does any of the following:

(1) Offers the same benefits to employees with domestic partners and employees with spouses and offers the same benefits to domestic partners and spouses of employees.

(2) Elects to provide the same benefits to individuals that are
 provided to employees’ spouses and employees’ domestic partners.

(3) Elects to provide benefits on a basis unrelated to an employee’s marital status or domestic partnership status, including, but not limited to, allowing each employee to designate a legally domiciled member of the employee’s household as being eligible for benefits.

(4) Elects not to provide benefits to employees based on their marital status or domestic partnership status, or elects not to provide benefits to employees’ spouses and to employees’ domestic partners.

(f) (1) Every contract subject to this chapter shall contain a statement by which the contractor certifies that the contractor is in compliance with this section.

(2) The department or other contracting
 agency shall enforce this section pursuant to its existing enforcement powers.

(3) (A) If a contractor falsely certifies that it is in compliance with this section, the contract with that contractor shall be subject to Article 9 (commencing with Section 10420), unless, within a time period specified by the department or other contracting agency, the contractor provides to the department or agency proof that it has complied, or is in the process of complying, with this section.

(B) The application of the remedies or penalties contained in Article 9 (commencing with Section 10420) to a contract subject to this chapter shall not preclude the application of any existing remedies otherwise available to the department or other contracting agency under its existing enforcement powers.

(g) Nothing in
 this section is intended to regulate the contracting practices of any local jurisdiction.

(h) This section shall be construed so as not to conflict with applicable federal laws, rules, or regulations. In the event that a court or agency of competent jurisdiction holds that federal law, rule, or regulation invalidates any clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, it is the intent of the state that the court or agency sever that clause, sentence, paragraph, or section so that the remainder of this section shall remain in effect.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 231, Sec. 1.   (SB 117)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.35.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency shall not enter into any contract for the acquisition of goods or services in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more with a contractor that, in the provision of benefits, discriminates between employees on the basis of an employee’s or dependent’s actual or perceived gender identity, including, but not limited to, the employee’s or dependent’s identification as transgender.

(2) For purposes of this section, “contract” includes contracts with a cumulative amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more per contractor in each fiscal year.

(3) For purposes of this section, an employee health plan is discriminatory if the plan is not consistent with Section 1365.5 of the Health and Safety Code and Section 10140 of the Insurance Code.

(4) The requirements of this section shall apply only to those portions of a contractor’s operations that occur under any of the following conditions:

(A) Within the state.

(B) On real property outside the state if the property is owned by the state or if the state has a right to occupy the property, and if the contractor’s presence at that location is connected to a contract with the state.

(C) Elsewhere in the United States where work related to a state contract is being performed.

(b) Contractors shall treat as confidential, to the maximum extent allowed by law or by the requirement of the contractor’s insurance provider, any request by an employee or applicant for employment benefits or any documentation of eligibility for benefits submitted by an employee or applicant for employment.

(c) After taking all reasonable measures to find a contractor that complies with this section, as determined by the state agency, the requirements of this section may be waived under any of the following circumstances:

(1) There is only one prospective contractor willing to enter into a specific contract with the state
 agency.

(2) The contract is necessary to respond to an emergency, as determined by the state agency, that endangers the public health, welfare, or safety, or the contract is necessary for the provision of essential services, and no entity that complies with the requirements of this section capable of responding to the emergency is immediately available.

(3) The requirements of this section violate, or are inconsistent with, the terms or conditions of a grant, subvention, or agreement, if the agency has made a good faith attempt to change the terms or conditions of any grant, subvention, or agreement to authorize application of this section.

(4) The contractor is providing wholesale or bulk water, power, or natural
 gas, the conveyance or transmission of the same, or ancillary services, as required for ensuring reliable services in accordance with good utility practice, if the purchase of the same cannot practically be accomplished through the standard competitive bidding procedures and the contractor is not providing direct retail services to end users.

(d) (1) A contractor shall not be deemed to discriminate in the provision of benefits if the contractor, in providing the benefits, pays the actual costs incurred in obtaining the benefit.

(2) If a contractor is unable to provide a certain benefit, despite taking reasonable measures to do so, the contractor shall not be deemed to discriminate in the provision of benefits.

(e) (1) Every contract subject to this chapter shall contain a statement by which the contractor certifies that the contractor is in compliance with this section.

(2) The department or other contracting agency shall enforce this section pursuant to its existing enforcement powers.

(3) (A) If a contractor falsely certifies that it is in compliance with this section, the contract with that contractor shall be subject to Article 9 (commencing with Section 10420), unless, within a time period specified by the department or other contracting agency, the contractor provides to the department or agency proof that it has complied, or is in the process of complying, with this section.

(B) The application of the remedies or penalties contained in Article 9 (commencing with Section 10420) to a contract subject to this chapter shall not preclude the application of any existing remedies otherwise available to the department or other contracting agency under its existing enforcement powers.

(f) Nothing in this section is intended to regulate the contracting practices of any local jurisdiction.

(g) This section shall be construed so as not to conflict with applicable federal laws, rules, or regulations. In the event that a court or agency of competent jurisdiction holds that federal law, rule, or regulation invalidates any clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, it is the intent of the
 state that the court or agency sever that clause, sentence, paragraph, or section so that the remainder of this section shall remain in effect.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 578, Sec. 1.   (SB 703)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.4.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency shall not enter into any contract for the acquisition of goods or services with a contractor whose name appears on either list of the 500 largest tax delinquencies pursuant to Section 7063 or 19195 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. Any contract entered into in violation of this subdivision is void and unenforceable.

(b) This section shall apply to any contract executed on or after July 1, 2012.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 455, Sec. 5.   (AB 1424)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.5.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency shall not acquire or utilize sand, gravel, aggregates, or other minerals produced from a surface mining operation subject to the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 2710) of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code), unless the operation is identified in the list published pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2717 of the Public Resources Code.

(b) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency shall not contract with a person who is not a surface mining operator, but who is supplying or utilizing sand, gravel, aggregates, or other minerals, to perform work for, or supply materials to, a
 state agency, unless the operation is identified in the list published pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2717 of the Public Resources Code.

(c) For purposes of this section, “minerals” means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

(d) The requirements of this section shall apply to mining operations on federal lands or Indian lands that are subject to the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 2710) of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code) pursuant to a memorandum of understanding between the Department of Conservation and the federal agency having jurisdiction over the
 lands.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 417, Sec. 1.   (SB 447)   Effective January 1, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.6.

Sections 10295 and 10297 do not apply to any contract entered into by the Department of Water Resources under Part 3 (commencing with Section 11100) of Division 6, Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 12930) of Part 6 of Division 6, Division 29 (commencing with Section 80700), or Division 29.5 (commencing with Section 80800), of the Water Code for the acquisition, sale, or transmission of power, or for services to facilitate those activities.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 367, Sec. 1.   (AB 1373)   Effective October 7, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10295.8.

For a contract awarded without competitive bidding for the acquisition of goods or services in the amount of seventy-five million dollars ($75,000,000) or more, entered into on or after January 1, 2023, the state agency, on or before the contract end date, shall submit to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee information regarding the terms and conditions of a proposed extension or renewal
 of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 543, Sec. 1.   (SB 1271)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10296.

(a) Every contract entered into by any state agency for any purpose specified in subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of Section 10295, or in Section 10295.6, shall contain a statement by which the contractor swears under penalty of perjury that no more than one final, unappealable finding of contempt of court by a federal court has been issued against the contractor within the immediately preceding two-year period because of the contractor’s failure to comply with an order of a federal court which orders the contractor to comply with an order of the National Labor Relations Board. For purposes of this section, a finding of contempt does not include any finding that has been vacated, dismissed, or otherwise removed by
 the court because the contractor has complied with the order which was the basis for the finding. The state may rescind any contract in which the contractor falsely swears to the truth of the statement required by this section.

(b) (1) This section does not apply to a credit card purchase of goods of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or less.

(2) The total amount of exemption authorized herein shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) per year for each company from which a state agency is purchasing goods by credit card. It shall be the responsibility of each state agency to monitor the use of this exemption and adhere to these restrictions on these purchases.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 587, Sec. 2.   (SB 224)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10297.

The provisions of Section 10295 shall apply both to contracts awarded through competitive bidding and those not subject to competitive bidding. The department shall deny its approval of a contract awarded through competitive bidding if it finds that the contract does not meet the specifications or other conditions of the bidding process, or if any applicable statutes or regulations regarding competitive bidding have been violated. With regard to any contract not awarded through competitive bidding, the department shall ascertain whether the contract is subject to competitive bidding requirements, and if it finds that is the case, the department shall deny its approval.

In making its determination on any contract, the department shall consider all other relevant factors, such as clarity of language and legality, and shall utilize its legal staff as necessary to facilitate the approval process.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10298.

(a) The director may consolidate the needs of multiple state agencies for goods, information technology, and services, and, pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), establish contracts, master agreements, multiple award schedules, cooperative agreements, including agreements with entities outside the state, and other types of agreements that leverage the state’s buying power, for acquisitions authorized under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10290), Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), and Chapter 3.6 (commencing with Section 12125). State and local agencies may contract with suppliers awarded those contracts without further competitive bidding.

(b) The director may make the services of the department available, upon the terms and conditions agreed to, to any city, county, city and county, district, or other local governmental body or corporation empowered to expend public funds for the acquisition of goods, information technology, or services for assisting the agency in acquisitions conducted pursuant to Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10290), Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), and Chapter 3.6 (commencing with Section 12125). The state shall not incur financial responsibility in connection with contracting for local agencies under this section.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2000, Ch. 918, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10298.1.

(a) The Department of General Services shall periodically review policies and procedures in the State Contracting Manual, and training provided to state personnel as it relates to reasonable accommodation purchases for state employees, pursuant to Section 19230 of the Government Code.

(b) On January 1, 2019, and biennially thereafter, the department, in consultation with the Department of Human Resources and the Department of Rehabilitation, shall post on its Internet Web site a report regarding the purchases of services, goods, information technology, and telecommunications related to reasonable accommodations for state employees, pursuant to Section 19230 of the Government Code. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the
 following:

(1) A review of policies and procedures in the State Contracting Manual and personnel training relating to acquisitions.

(2) Available data on the number and types of acquisitions made by state entities.

(3) Any recommendations to improve the acquisition process.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 405, Sec. 8.   (SB 846)   Effective September 14, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

10298.5.

(a) The director may use the procedures described in Section 10298 for contracts for the installation, and contracts for the purchase and installation, of carpet, resilient flooring, synthetic turf, or lighting fixtures that will satisfy the requirements of this section. Except as specified in subdivision (b), notwithstanding any other law requiring bidding on public works projects, as defined in Section 1101, state agencies and local agencies, including school districts and any other agency subject to the Local Agency Public Construction Act (Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 20100) of Part 3), may contract with suppliers awarded those contracts, if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

(1) The installation work is not performed in
 connection with new construction.

(2) The contractor provides an acknowledgment to the state or local agency that the installation is a public work for purposes of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(3) (A) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (B), the contractor provides the state or local agency with an enforceable commitment that a skilled and trained workforce, as defined in Section 2601, will be used to complete the installation work.

(B) This paragraph shall not apply if the state or local agency has entered into a project labor agreement, as defined in Section 2500, that requires all contractors and subcontractors performing the installation work to use a skilled and trained workforce and the contractor agrees to be bound by that
 project labor agreement.

(b) A local agency shall not use the procedures authorized by this section for a contract with an award amount that exceeds the amount in an applicable requirement for the local agency to use a formal competitive bidding process for a contract that exceeds a specified amount. 

(c) (1) Any state or local agency that enters into a contract for installation, or for purchase or installation, pursuant to this section shall provide notice of that contract to the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to Section 1773.3 of the Labor Code, regardless of the size of the contract.

(2) (A) Notwithstanding Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, no later than January 1, 2027, the Department of Industrial Relations shall submit to the appropriate policy and
 fiscal committees of the Legislature a report on the use of the procedures authorized by this section.

(B) The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

(i) A description of the contracts awarded using the procedures authorized by this section, including the state or local agency that awarded the contract.

(ii) The contract award amounts.

(iii) The contractors awarded the contracts.

(C) The report submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code. 

(d) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2028, and
 as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 310, Sec. 2.   (SB 1422)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2028, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

10299.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the director may consolidate the needs of multiple state agencies for information technology goods and services, and, pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), establish contracts, master agreements, multiple award schedules, cooperative agreements, including agreements with entities outside the state, and other types of agreements that leverage the state’s buying power, for acquisitions authorized under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10290), Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), and Chapter 3.6 (commencing with Section 12125). State agencies and local agencies may contract with suppliers awarded the contracts without further competitive bidding.

(b) The director may make the services of the department available, upon the terms and conditions agreed upon, to any school district empowered to expend public funds. These school districts may, without further competitive bidding, utilize contracts, master agreements, multiple award schedules, cooperative agreements, or other types of agreements established by the department for use by school districts for the acquisition of information technology, goods, and services. The state shall incur no financial responsibility in connection with the contracting of local agencies under this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2000, Ch. 127, Sec. 30.   Effective July 10, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10299.1.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the director shall operate the Natural Gas Services Program to consolidate and address the needs of multiple state agencies for the procurement of natural gas and related services.

(b) Procurement of natural gas and related services is vital to public sector facilities in California and, due to the volumes and costs involved, this section authorizes the following:

(1) The director shall make the services of the department with respect to the acquisition of natural gas and related services available, under agreed upon terms and conditions, to any city, county, city and county,
 district, or other local governmental body, and to any nonprofit hospital or educational institution that expends public funds.

(2) The department is authorized to enter into interagency agreements with the entities listed in paragraph (1) for the acquisition of natural gas and related services. The department may enter into contracts, master agreements, multiple award schedules, cooperative agreements, agreements with entities outside the state, and other types of agreements that leverage the state’s buying power through the use of a competitive bidding process. The state shall not incur financial responsibility in connection with the contracting of nonstate agencies under this section.

(3) The department may buy, sell, exchange, transfer, or otherwise dispose of natural
 gas acquired by the department pursuant to this section, and may recover the department’s acquisition and other costs to operate the program through customer charges or fees.

(4) The department may enter into gas purchase transactions for a term longer than five years, if specifically approved by the director.

(5) The program shall adjust to changes in customer requirements and market conditions and create and manage an ongoing pool of gas suppliers.

(6) The department is authorized to provide additional services to customers related to the environmental aspects of energy use and the requirements related to greenhouse gas regulations, renewable energy requirements, and similar programs and requirements.

(c) Agencies that are in the executive branch of the state government, except the Department of Water Resources, shall use the department’s Natural Gas Services Program for noncore gas purchases of natural gas to ensure maximum participation resulting in the best discounts and prices for the commodity. The director may allow exemptions to this requirement.

(d) For purposes of this section, “natural gas” includes, but is not limited to,
 natural gas, methane, biomethane, compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas, and other energy commodity that is similar to natural gas, and related services, including, but not limited to, gas storage, gas transportation, and forward purchases of natural gas.

(e) During any period in which a Budget Act has not been approved, the department shall continue to receive payment transfers from agencies that are not in the executive branch of the state government and agencies that are in the executive branch of state government that are able to pay because they operate with funds that
 are continuously appropriated.

(f) The department is authorized to charge, collect, and hold funds from a customer that voluntarily requests prepaid long-term natural gas supplies, for a period not to exceed 20 years.

(g) The Department of General Services Natural Gas Services Program
 Fund is hereby established in the State Treasury. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, the fund is hereby continuously appropriated to the department without regard to fiscal year, for the purposes of operating the Natural Gas Services Program.

(1) All revenues payable to the department for natural gas and related services shall be deposited in this fund. Any payments from this fund shall only be made for those purposes described in and consistent with this section.

(2) The Natural Gas Services Program’s customer fee revenues
 cannot be shifted or borrowed from the fund.

(3) If at the end of any fiscal year, there are unexpended revenues, those revenues shall be retained in the fund and reserved for future Natural Gas Services Program expenses.

(h) Funding for the costs incurred by the department in administering this section shall be provided for in the annual Budget Act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 615, Sec. 1.   (AB 650)   Effective January 1, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

10299.5.

(a) (1) On and after January 1, 2025, subject to limited exceptions as set forth in subdivision (d), each state agency that enters into a contract with a private entity solely for call center work to provide public or customer service for that state agency or another state agency shall provide a report to the department that contains all of the information set forth in paragraph (2).

(2) The number of total jobs and the overall percentage that shall be located within the state, as well as the number and percentage of jobs that shall be located in any other state or states as well as identifying the state and type of jobs located in those states.

(b) If the
 contract is solely for overflow, emergency, or other contingency, the information described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) shall be provided in addition to the terms of contingency.

(c) The department shall maintain a master list of contracts pursuant to this section and an aggregate number of jobs, including how many are located in another state. This list shall be made available, upon request, to any member of the public.

(d) This section shall not apply to a contract or any subcontract reached between a private entity and the State of California or other authority of the State of California where call center services are secondary and the services to be provided are related to state employee benefits.

(e) For purposes of this section, “state agency” means any agency, department, division, commission, board,
 bureau, officer, or other authority of the State of California.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 697, Sec. 1.   (AB 2068)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Competitive Bidding and Other Acquisition Procedures [10300. - 10334.]

10300.

(a) A Customer and Supplier Advocate shall be established in the department as a resource to state agencies and departments, and suppliers seeking information regarding the state process, procedures, and regulations for bidding on state contracts, and as a resource to bidders seeking to file a protest on award in accordance with this chapter. The advocate shall, at a minimum, provide the following services to the protesting bidder:

(1) Assistance to customer departments and agencies regarding contracting rules and regulations, and acquisition resource options.

(2) Assistance to the bidder in assessing the validity of the bidder’s proposed grounds of filing the protest in accordance with the terms of the solicitation, as well as statutory or regulatory guidelines governing the solicitation in question.

(3) Provision of information to the protesting bidder regarding avenues and options available to the bidder to proceed with a formal protest of the award.

(b) The advocate shall make services, as specified in this section, available on a timely basis to the protesting bidder.

(c) Notification to bidders regarding the availability of services by the advocate shall be included in the solicitation. This notification shall also outline procedures and timelines for bidders who may wish to engage the services of the advocate.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 10.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10301.

Except in cases when the agency and the department agree that an article of a specified brand or trade name is the only article that will properly meet the needs of the agency, or in cases where the Department of General Services has made a determination pursuant to Section 10308, all contracts for the acquisition or lease of goods in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or a higher amount as established by the director, shall be made or entered into with the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications.

For purposes of determining the lowest bid, the amount of sales tax shall be excluded from the total amount of the bid.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2016, Ch. 31, Sec. 262.   (SB 836)   Effective June 27, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

10302.

(a) Except in cases of emergency where immediate purchase of goods without bid is necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare, or safety, whenever the department contracts for goods in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or a higher amount as established by the director, the department shall advertise in the California State Contracts Register the availability of its solicitation, and interested suppliers, upon request, shall be furnished with copies of the solicitation. In addition to advertising in the California State Contracts Register, the department shall post in a public place a copy of the solicitation, which shall remain posted until seven days after an award has been made. Whenever a contract in excess of
 twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or a higher amount as established by the director, is made pursuant to this section or Section 10301 without the taking of bids, the department shall prepare a written document stating the fact of the contract together with the facts requiring the contract of the goods without the taking of bids. This document shall be maintained by the department and shall be available as a public record.

(b) (1) Every solicitation shall contain the following statement:

“It is unlawful for any person engaged in business within this state to sell or use any article or product as a “loss leader” as defined in Section 17030 of the Business and Professions Code.”

(2) On and after March 31, 2010, and until December 31, 2011, if a solicitation does not contain the statement required by paragraph
 (1), the awarding agency shall report this error to the department within 30 days of the date the awarding agency discovers this error.

(3) The department shall post in the State Contracting Manual instructions for including the statement required by paragraph (1) in all affected contracts.

(4) The statement required by paragraph (1) shall be deemed to be part of a solicitation even if the statement is inadvertently omitted from the solicitation.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 490, Sec. 4.   (AB 926)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

10302.5.

All product specifications that the department or any other state agency prepares for goods for any contract entered into by any state agency for the acquisition of goods under Section 10295 are not subject to the review and adoption procedure under Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 11.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10302.6.

Product specifications as prepared by the department or any other state agency shall not be written with the intent of excluding goods manufactured, produced, grown, or otherwise originating in California.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 12.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10303.

The department shall adopt, publish and apply uniform standards of rating bidders, on the basis of questionnaires and required statements, with respect to contracts upon which each bidder is qualified to bid. The department may adopt and publish lists of qualified bidders. No list so adopted and published shall preclude a qualified bidder not on the list from submitting a bid or bids and from being awarded a contract or contracts as the successful bidder.

The department may remove a bidder who has demonstrated a lack of reliability in complying with and completing previously awarded contracts with the state, based upon his or her performance on contracts previously been awarded by the state. The department may remove the bidder from any list of qualified bidders prepared by the department for a period of not less than six months but not to exceed 36 months.

Any bidder temporarily removed under this section shall be returned to the list of qualified bidders at any time after the initial six months, upon demonstrating to the department’s satisfaction that the problems that resulted in the bidder’s previously demonstrated unreliability in complying with and completing state contracts have been corrected.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2004, Ch. 277, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 2005.)
-------------------------------------------

10304.

All bids shall be sealed and shall be publicly opened and read at the time set forth in the solicitation, provided any person present desires the bids to be so read. No bids shall be considered which have not been received in the office of the department prior to the closing time for bids set forth in the invitations to bids. The department shall maintain confidentiality regarding each bid until the public opening and reading takes place.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 13.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10304.1.

Notwithstanding Sections 10301, 10302, and 10304, the Department of Water Resources may award contracts for the acquisition of specialized equipment for facilities of the State Water Resources Development System, as defined in Section 12931 of the Water Code. Prior to exercising the authority granted by this section, the Department of Water Resources, in collaboration with the department, shall establish the conditions under which any contract in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) is awarded without the competitive bidding process. The conditions shall be developed to expedite operations and maintenance work to reduce the risk of the loss of water or power to the State Water Resources Development System, and shall require the Department of Water Resources to prepare a written document declaring that the contract meets those conditions. Consistent with
 its authority under Section 10297, the department shall review those contracts for consistency with the conditions established pursuant to this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 587, Sec. 3.   (SB 224)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10305.

After being opened the bids shall be available for public inspection and tabulations shall be completed within seven days.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10306.

(a) Whenever a contract under this article is not to be awarded to the lowest bidder, the bidder shall be notified 24 hours prior to awarding the contract to another bidder. Upon written request by any bidder who has submitted a bid, notice of the proposed award shall be posted in a public place
 specified in the solicitation document by the department, that may include an electronic location or Internet Web site, at least 24 hours prior to awarding the contract. If prior to making the award, any bidder who has submitted a bid files a protest with the department against the awarding of the contract on the ground that he or she is the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, the contract shall not be awarded until either the protest has been withdrawn or the department has made a final decision as to the action to be taken relative to the protest. In computing the
 24-hour periods provided for in this section, Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded.

(b) Within 10 days after filing a protest, the protesting bidder shall file with the department a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the ground of the protest and the facts in support thereof.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 335, Sec. 3.   (SB 1505)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

10307.

The director shall establish statewide acquisition standards, the purpose of which shall be to ensure the necessary quality of goods acquired by or under the supervision of the department and to permit the consolidation of acquisitions in order to effect greater economies in state contracting.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 14.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10308.

Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, every acquisition of goods in excess of one hundred dollars ($100) for any state agency shall be made by or under the supervision of the department. However, the state agency may specify the quality of the goods to be acquired. If the department determines that the quality specified by the agency is inconsistent with the statewide standards established by the director under Section 10307, it shall change the request to make it consistent with the standards, and it shall notify the state agency, within a reasonable time, before a contract is issued. If the agency is of the opinion the interests of the state would not be served by the acquisition of goods of a lesser quality or different than that specified by the agency, the
 agency may request a hearing before the department and the department shall determine which goods will best serve the interests of the state, whereupon the department shall issue a contract for the goods specified by the department.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2016, Ch. 31, Sec. 264.   (SB 836)   Effective June 27, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

10309.

Except as provided in Sections 10332 and 10333, no state agency may acquire goods in the open market, unless permission has been given by the department, upon a showing of the necessity therefor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 17.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10310.

Upon the request of the department, every state agency that is authorized by law to acquire goods shall designate some person in the agency whose duty it shall be to make reports to the department at times and in a manner as it may require.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 18.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10311.

(a) An estimate or requisition approved by the state agency in control of the appropriation or fund against which an acquisition is to be charged, is full authority for any contract for goods of the quality specified by the agency or determined by the department as provided in this article made pursuant thereto by the department.

(b) The department shall issue a call for bids within 30 days after receiving a requisition for any goods that are regularly acquired within this state. The period of closing time designated in the invitations for bids shall be exclusive of holidays and shall be extended to the next working day after a holiday.

(c) Except as provided in subdivision (d), after the closing date for receiving any bids within or without this state, the contract shall be awarded or the bids shall be rejected within 45 days unless a protest is filed as provided in Section 10306.

(d) After the 45-day time period prescribed by subdivision (c), the department may in its sound discretion either award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications who remains willing to accept the award or else reject all bids.

(e) The amendments made to this section at the 1987–88 Regular Session of the Legislature do not constitute a change in, but are declaratory of, existing law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2016, Ch. 31, Sec. 265.   (SB 836)   Effective June 27, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

10312.

Immediately upon the rendition of services or the delivery of goods, the disbursing officer shall transmit the invoice or demand for payment together with his or her sworn statement to the Controller. The sworn statement shall show that the services have been rendered and the goods delivered to the state agency in accordance with the contract and law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 20.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10313.

The director may make the services of the department under this article available, upon those terms and conditions as he or she may deem satisfactory, to any tax-supported public agency in the state, including a school district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 402, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10314.

Any contract for goods to be manufactured by the contractor specially for the state and not suitable for sale to others in the ordinary course of the contractor’s business may provide, on such terms and conditions as the department deems necessary to protect the state’s interests, for progress payments for work performed and costs incurred at the contractor’s shop or plant, provided that not less than 10 percent of the contract price is required to be withheld until final delivery and acceptance of the goods, and provided further, that the contractor is required to submit a faithful performance bond, acceptable to the department, in a sum not less than one-half of the total amount payable under the contract securing the faithful performance of the contract by the contractor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 22.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10315.

The department may rent, lease, construct, and maintain warehouses and make the rules and regulations that are necessary for the proper and economical making of state acquisitions.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 23.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10316.

The department may insure in the name of the state any goods or merchandise belonging to the state which are stored in any warehouse or storage depot not under exclusive state control, in an amount sufficient to indemnify the state against loss or damage by fire. Premiums for such insurance shall be paid out of the Service Revolving Fund and prorated and added to the price of the goods or merchandise.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10317.

Each person in the department who has personal supervision and control of any warehouse or storage depot wherein merchandise or goods belonging to the state are stored, shall execute to the people of the state a bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000). Premiums on the bonds shall be paid by the state as are the premiums upon the bonds of state officers.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10318.

No state agency or employee thereof shall draft or cause to be drafted, any specifications for bids, in connection with the acquisition or contemplated acquisition of any goods or textbooks for use in the day and evening elementary schools of the state, in such a manner as to limit the bidding directly or indirectly, to any one bidder.

Bidders may be required to furnish a bond or other indemnification to the state against claims or liability for patent infringement.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 24.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10319.

To meet an emergency, goods of a perishable nature, in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) in value, may be acquired by a state agency without the permission of the department.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 25.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10320.5.

(a) Commencing January 1, 1992, all state agencies subject to this chapter that enter into installment purchase or lease-purchase contracts shall make periodic payments, which shall include interest computed from a date no later than the acceptance date of the goods purchased pursuant to the contract. However, if the contract requires an acceptance test, interest shall be computed from a date no later than the first day of the successful acceptance test period. Unless otherwise provided for in the contract, periodic payments shall commence upon acceptance of the goods or, if the contract requires an acceptance test, as of the first day of the successful acceptance test period. Late charges shall accrue for any periodic payment not made to the contractor or its assigns from either the payment date provided in the contract or 60 days following the receipt of a valid invoice for the periodic payment, whichever is later. However, in the event any invoice is received prior to the acceptance date, the receipt date of the invoice shall be construed to be the acceptance date. Late charges under this section shall be assessed using the interest rate as specified in Section 927.6 of the Government Code.

(b) The department is authorized to refinance installment purchase contracts when, in the determination of the department, it is financially beneficial to the state to do so.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 27.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10322.

Any person who supplies any state agency with livestock products derived from any of the animals enumerated in Section 19501 of the Food and Agricultural Code shall file with the department a sworn statement that the animals were slaughtered by methods defined in that section and in Sections 19502 and 19503 of the Food and Agricultural Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10323.

To assist the department and other state agencies in the enforcement of the provisions of Section 19501 of the Food and Agricultural Code, the Department of Food and Agriculture shall provide, through cooperation with the United States Department of Agriculture in the enforcement of Public Law 85-765 and by means of appropriate regulations, suitable methods of identifying the carcasses of animals inspected and passed under Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 18651) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Food and Agricultural Code that have been slaughtered by methods prescribed by Sections 19501, 19502, and 19503 of that code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10325.

Each quarter, the department shall, upon request, provide each city, county, city and county, district, local government body, or public corporation empowered to expend public funds for the acquisition of consumable goods and other interested parties with a list of those items available for acquisition under Section 10324. The department may supplement the quarterly lists with a monthly supplement of changes, additions and deletions. Terms, conditions, and specifications shall be provided upon request.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 29.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10326.

In establishing bid specifications for the acquisition of motor vehicles and in determining the lowest responsible bidder, consideration may be given by the state to the probable resale value of the vehicles as determined by recognized published used car marketing guides and other established historical evidence of future used motor vehicle value or, in lieu thereof, by contractual guarantee of the apparent low bidder that the resale value of the vehicle will be no less in proportion to bid price than any other comparable vehicle complying with specifications for which a bid was received.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 30.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10326.1.

(a) A campus or a facility of a California Community College or a campus or a facility of the California State University, that owns, leases, or otherwise has possession or control of a 15-passenger van, may not, on or after January 1, 2005, authorize the operation of that van for the purpose of transporting passengers unless the person driving or otherwise operating that van has both of the following:

(1) A valid class B driver’s license, as provided in Division 6 (commencing with Section 12500) of the Vehicle Code, issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles.

(2) An endorsement for operating a passenger transportation vehicle, as provided in Article 6 (commencing with Section 15275) of Chapter 7 of Division 6 of the Vehicle Code, issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), for purposes of this section, a “15-passenger van” means any van manufactured to accommodate 15 passengers, including the driver, regardless of whether that van has been altered to accommodate fewer than 15 passengers.

(2) For purposes of this section, a “15-passenger van” does not mean a 15-passenger van with dual rear wheels that has a gross weight rating equal to, or greater than, 11,500 pounds.

(c) The Legislature recommends that the Regents of the University of California adopt rules and regulations similar to the provisions contained in this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 559, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10327.

Except for motor vehicles described in Section 43805 of the Health and Safety Code, the provisions of Article 1 (commencing with Section 43800) of Chapter 4 of Part 5 of Division 26 of the Health and Safety Code shall govern the acquisition of all motor vehicles by the state to the extent that the department determines that these low-emission vehicles are reasonable to meet state needs pursuant to Section 43804 of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 31.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10328.

The bid requirements prescribed in this article are not applicable to contracts for the acquisition of the following:

(a) Fluid milk and fluid cream, the price of which is established in accordance with Section 61871 of the Food and Agricultural Code.

(b) Fruits and vegetables procured under contract with growers for the use of canneries maintained and operated by state agencies, if these canneries are maintained and operated so that their canned products will meet the standards prescribed for similar commercially packed canned products under federal law.

(c) Agricultural surpluses that are available to the state or its agencies by any governmental agency.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 32.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10329.

No person shall willfully split a single transaction into a series of transactions for the purpose of evading the bidding requirements of this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 537.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

10330.

On July 1 of each year, the department shall establish the minimum dollar level below which authority to acquire goods shall be delegated to state agencies that meet the requirements of Section 10333. The level established at eight hundred dollars ($800) on January 1, 1983, and adjusted on July 1, 1983, pursuant to former Section 14792.1 of the Government Code, shall be retained and adjusted each July 1 thereafter to reflect, at a minimum, the percentage change from April 1 of the prior year to April 1 of the current year in the California Consumer Price Index for all items, as determined by the California Department of Industrial Relations.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 33.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10331.

The department shall establish a program for delegating authority to acquire goods to state agencies that meet the requirements of Section 10333. Each delegation shall be subject to annual review by the department. Delegated authority may be withdrawn at any time the department finds that the state agency to which authority has been delegated is not in compliance with the requirements of Section 10333.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 34.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

10332.

Any state agency that receives delegated authority to acquire goods shall be authorized, at a minimum, to make the following types of acquisitions:

(a) Acquisitions not exceeding the dollar value established pursuant to Section 10330.

(b) Acquisitions in any amount of goods available under an unexpired statewide or regional contract. Acquisitions of goods for which a valid statewide or regional contract is in effect may not be made, without the approval of the office, from a supplier other than the supplier with whom the state has a valid contract.

(c) Acquisitions in any amount of
 goods that state agencies are required, by Section 2807 of the Penal Code, to acquire from the
 California Correctional Training and Rehabilitation Authority.

(d) Acquisitions not exceeding the dollar amount, established pursuant to Section 10330, of goods designated in price schedules that the office has established with suppliers. Acquisitions not exceeding the dollar amount, established pursuant to Section 10330, of goods designated in price schedules may be made from a supplier other than the supplier specified on a price schedule if another supplier offers the same or equivalent goods at a price lower than the price established in the price schedule. The agency shall notify the office prior to making the acquisition. The acquisition may be made 48 hours after receipt of the notice by the office unless the office advises the agency that the goods to be acquired are not the same or equivalent to the goods specified
 on a price schedule.

(e) Acquisitions not exceeding the dollar value, established pursuant to Section 10330, of goods that are available from the state warehouses but which the state agency can acquire from another supplier at a price lower than the price charged by the department. The agency shall notify the office prior to making the acquisition. The acquisition may be made 48 hours after receipt of the notice by the office unless the office advises the agency that the goods to be acquired are not the same or equivalent to the goods available from the state warehouses.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 241, Sec. 65.   (SB 857)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

10333.

(a) The department shall delegate purchasing authority, as specified in Section 10332, to any state agency that does all of the following:

(1) Designates an agency officer as responsible and directly accountable for the agency’s purchasing program.

(2) Establishes written policies and procedures, including procedures for ensuring and documenting competitive purchasing, complying with purchasing standards established pursuant to Section 10307, inspecting acquired products for compliance with specifications, reporting contractor failures to deliver products as specified in contracts, ensuring that agency contracting personnel are free from conflict of interest,
 and complying with other provisions of law as the department may require.

(3) Establishes procedures for complying with the provisions of the Small Business Procurement and Contract Act (Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 14835) of Part 5.5 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code). The procedures shall include procedures for meeting the goals for the extent of participation of small businesses in state contracting as established by the department pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 14838 of the Government Code.

(4) Establishes policies for training personnel in purchasing law and procedures, controlling and reviewing purchasing practices, auditing purchasing activities, and delegating purchasing authority within the agency.

(5) Reports the data to the office that the department may require.

(b) The department shall conduct an audit of each state agency to which purchasing authority has been delegated at least once in each three-year period. The authority to acquire goods may be withdrawn by the department at any time that the department finds that the state agency to which authority has been delegated is not in compliance with the requirements of this section.

(c) The department shall maintain procedures for complying with the State Agency Buy Recycled Campaign (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 12153)). The procedures shall include procedures for meeting the minimum recycled content requirements in state contracting as established by CalRecycle pursuant to Section 12209 and procedures for complying with reporting requirements as established by CalRecycle pursuant to Section 12211.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 1.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10334.

(a) No state employee shall acquire any goods from the state, unless the goods are offered to the general public in the regular course of the state’s business on the same terms and conditions as those applicable to the employee. “State employee,” as used in this section, means any employee of the state included within Section 82009 of the Government Code, and all officers and employees included within Section 4 of Article VII of the California Constitution, except those persons excluded from the definition of “designated employee” under the last paragraph of Section 82019 of the Government Code.

(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), any peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, employed by the State
 of California for a period of more than 120 months who has been duly retired through a service retirement or a peace officer retiring from a job-incurred disability not related to a mental or emotional disorder and who has been granted the legal right to carry a concealed firearm pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 25450) of Chapter 2 of Division 5 of Title 4 of Part 6 of the Penal Code may be authorized by the person’s department head to purchase his or her state-issued handgun. Disability retired peace officers need not meet the 120-month employment requirement. The cost of the handgun shall be the fair market value as listed in the annual Blue Book of Gun Values or replacement cost, whichever is less, of the handgun issued as determined by the appointing power, plus a charge for the cost of handling. The retiring officer shall request to purchase his or her handgun in writing to the department within 30 calendar days of his or her retirement date.

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), any peace officer described in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code employed by the State of California who is authorized to carry firearms may purchase his or her state-issued service firearm if the person’s department head directs the department to change its state-issued service weapon system. The cost of the service firearm shall be the fair market value as listed in the annual Blue Book of Gun Values or replacement cost, whichever is less, of the firearm issued as determined by the department head, plus a charge for the cost of handling. The requesting officer shall request to purchase his or her firearm in writing to the department within 10 calendar days of receiving the new state-issued weapon.

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the spouse
 or domestic partner of a peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code who was employed by the State of California and who died in the line of duty, may be authorized by his or her spouse’s or domestic partner’s department head to purchase his or her state-issued handgun. The cost of the handgun shall be the fair market value of the handgun as listed in the annual Blue Book of Gun Values or replacement cost, whichever is less, as determined by the appointing power, plus a charge for the cost of handling. The spouse or domestic partner shall request to purchase the handgun in writing to the department within 30 calendar days of his or her spouse’s
 or domestic partner’s death. A sale of a firearm pursuant to this subdivision shall be made pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 28050) of Division 6 of Title 4 of Part 6 of the Penal Code, as required by Section 27545 of the Penal Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 16, Sec. 2.   (AB 685)   Effective January 1, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Contracts for Services [10335. - 10381.]

10335.

(a) This article shall apply to all contracts, including amendments, entered into by any state agency for services to be rendered to the state, whether or not the services involve the furnishing or use of equipment, materials, or supplies or are performed by an independent contractor. Except as provided in Sections 10295.6 and 10351, and paragraphs (8) and (9) of subdivision (b) of Section 10340, all contracts subject to this article are of no effect unless and until approved by the department. Each contract shall be transmitted with all papers, estimates, and recommendations concerning it to the department and, if approved by the department, shall be effective from the date of approval. This article shall apply to any state agency that by
 general or specific statute is expressly or impliedly authorized to enter into the transactions referred to in this section. This article shall not apply to contracts for the construction, alteration, improvement, repair, or maintenance of real or personal property, contracts for services subject to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code, to contracts that are listed as exceptions in Section 10295, contracts of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) in amount, contracts of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) where only per diem or travel expenses, or a combination thereof, are to be paid, contracts between state agencies, or contracts between a state agency and local agency or federal agency.

(b) In exercising its authority under this article with respect to contracts for the
 services of legal counsel, other than the Attorney General, entered into by any state agency that is subject to Section 11042 or Section 11043 of the Government Code, the department, as a condition of approval of the contract, shall require the state agency to demonstrate that the consent of the Attorney General to the employment of the other counsel has been granted pursuant to Section 11040 of the Government Code. This consent shall not be construed in a manner that would authorize the Attorney General to establish a separate program for reviewing and approving contracts in the place of, or in addition to, the program administered by the department pursuant to this article.

(c) Until January 1, 2001, the department shall maintain a list of contracts approved pursuant to subdivision (b). This list shall be filed quarterly with the Senate
 Committee on Budget and Fiscal Review and the Assembly Committee on Budget. The list shall be limited to contracts with a consideration in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) during the life of the contract and shall include sufficient information to identify the provider of legal
 services, the length of each contract, applicable hourly rates, and the need for the services. The department shall add a contract that meets these conditions to the list within 10 days after approval. A copy of the list shall be made available to any requester. The department may charge a fee to cover the cost of supplying the list as provided in Section 7922.530 of the Government Code.

(d) Contracts subject to the approval of the department shall also have the department’s approval for a modification or amendment thereto, with the following exceptions:

(1) An amendment to a contract that only extends the original time for completion of performance for a period of one year or less is exempt. If the original contract was subject to approval by the department, one fully
 executed copy including transmittal document, explaining the reason for the extension, shall be sent to the legal office of the department. A contract may only be amended once under this exemption.

(2) Contracts let or awarded on the basis of a law requiring competitive bidding may be modified or amended only if the contract so provides or if authorized by the law requiring competitive bidding.

(3) If an amendment to a contract has the effect of giving the contract as amended an increase in monetary amount, or an agreement by the state to indemnify or save harmless any person, the amendment shall be approved by the department.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 357.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

10335.5.

(a) “Consulting services contract,” as used in this article, means services that do all of the following:

(1) Are of an advisory nature.

(2) Provide a recommended course of action or personal expertise.

(3) Have an end product that is basically a transmittal of information either written or verbal and that is related to the governmental functions of state agency administration and management and program management or innovation.

(4) Are obtained by awarding a contract, a grant, or any other payment of funds for services of the above type.

The product may include anything from answers to specific questions to design of a system or plan, and includes workshops, seminars, retreats, and conferences for which paid expertise is retained by contract.

(b) “Consulting services contract” does not include any of the following:

(1) Contracts between a state agency and the federal government.

(2) Contracts with local agencies, as defined in Section 2211 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, to subvene federal funds for which no matching state funds are required.

(c) The following consulting services contracts are exempt from the advertising and bidding requirements of this article:

(1) Contracts that are temporary or time-limited appointments to a nontesting civil service classification for the purpose of meeting a time-limited employment need. Selection and compensation for these appointments shall be made in accordance with state civil service requirements. Payment under a consulting service contract may be on the basis of each hour or day devoted to the task or in one lump sum for the end product.

(2) Contracts that can only be performed by a public entity as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 605 of the Unemployment Insurance Code.

(3) Contracts solely for the purpose of obtaining expert witnesses for litigation.

(4) Contracts for legal defense, legal advice, or legal services.

(5) Contracts in an amount of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(6) Contracts entered into pursuant to Section 14838.5 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10335.7.

“State agency,” as used in this article, means every state office, department, division, bureau, board, or commission, but does not include the Legislature, the courts, or any agency in the judicial branch of government.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 10357 by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 21.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10336.

The Department of Finance may establish those controls over approval of contracts by the department as are necessary to assure that approval is consistent with program and budgetary determinations of the Department of Finance. The controls established under this section shall not be constructed in a fashion or be construed in a manner which would authorize the Department of Finance to establish a separate program for reviewing and approving contracts in the place of, or in addition to, the program administered by the department pursuant to this article. The Department of Finance, when it has reason to believe that a proposed contract is not in compliance with its program and budgetary determinations, may direct a state agency to transmit the contract to it for review. It is the intent of the Legislature, however, that any review of this type shall be restricted to individual contracts and shall occur only if no alternative course of action satisfactory to the Department of Finance is available.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10337.

(a) The State Personnel Board may establish such standards and controls over approval of contracts by the Department of General Services as are necessary to assure that the approval is consistent with the merit employment principles and requirements contained in Article VII of the California Constitution. The substantive provisions of the standards shall be established at the discretion of the State Personnel Board. The specific procedures for contract review pursuant to such standards shall be established jointly by the board and the department.

It is the intent of the Legislature that except as provided in this section, the standards and controls established under this subdivision shall not be constructed in such a fashion or construed in such a manner as to authorize the State Personnel Board to establish a separate program for reviewing and approving each and every contract in the place of, or in addition to, the program administered by the Department of General Services pursuant to this article. The State Personnel Board may, when it has reason to believe that a proposed contract is not in compliance with the provisions of Section 19130 of the Government Code, and shall, when requested to do so by an employee organization representing state employees, direct a state agency to transmit the contract to it for review.

(b) The State Personnel Board shall direct any state agency to transmit to it for review any contract proposed or executed pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 19130 of the Government Code, if the review has been requested by an employee organization notified pursuant to Section 19131 of the Government Code. The review shall occur prior to any review conducted by the Department of General Services. The board shall restrict its review to the question as to whether the contract complies with the provisions of subdivision (a) of Section 19130 of the Government Code and any additional standards and controls established pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section. The board may disapprove the contract only if it determines that the contract does not comply.

The board shall delegate the review of such a contract to the executive officer of the board. Within 15 days of its receipt, the executive officer shall notify the employee organization which requested the review whether he or she intends to approve or disapprove it. If the employee organization requests it, the executive officer shall grant the employee organization the opportunity to present its case against the contract and the reasons why the contract should be referred to the board for a hearing. Upon a showing of good cause by the employee organization, the executive officer shall schedule the disputed contract for a hearing before the board for the purpose of receiving evidence and hearing arguments concerning the propriety of the disputed contract. In any case, the executive officer shall approve or disapprove the contract or refer it to the board for a hearing within 30 days of its receipt. The reasons for a decision by the executive officer, or the board, approving or disapproving the contract shall be stated in writing.

(c) A contract proposed or executed pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 19130 of the Government Code shall be reviewed by the State Personnel Board if the board receives a request to conduct such a review from an employee organization representing state employees. Any such review shall be restricted to the question as to whether the contract complies with the provisions of subdivision (b) of Section 19130 of the Government Code. The board shall delegate the review of such a contract to the executive officer of the board. If the employee organization requests it, the executive officer shall grant the employee organization the opportunity to present its case against the contract and the reasons why the contract should be referred to the board for a hearing. Upon a showing of good cause by the employee organization, the executive officer shall schedule the disputed contract for a hearing before the board for the purpose of receiving evidence and hearing arguments concerning the propriety of the disputed contract. The executive officer shall approve or disapprove the contract or refer it to the board for a hearing within 30 days of its receipt. The reasons for the decision by the executive officer, or the board, approving or disapproving the contract shall be stated in writing.

(d) Contracts subject to State Personnel Board review under this section shall not become effective unless and until approval is granted.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10339.

(a) Subject to the provisions of Section 10348, no state agency shall draft, or cause to be drafted, any invitation to bid or request for proposal, in connection with the awarding of a contract, in a manner that limits the bidding directly or indirectly to any one bidder.

(b) Any contract awarded in violation of subdivision (a) shall be void.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10340.

(a) Except as provided by subdivision (b), a state agency shall secure at least three competitive bids or proposals for each contract.

(b) Three competitive bids or proposals are not required in any of the following cases:

(1) In cases of an emergency where a contract is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, welfare, or safety, or protection of state property.

(2) When the state agency awarding the contract has advertised the contract in the California State Contracts Register and has solicited all potential contractors known to the state agency, but has received less than three bids or proposals.

(3) (A) The contract is with another state agency, a local governmental entity, an auxiliary organization of the California State University, an auxiliary organization of a California community college, a foundation organized to support the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges, or an auxiliary organization of the Student Aid Commission established pursuant to Section 69522 of the Education Code. These contracts, however, shall not be used to circumvent the competitive bidding requirements of this article.

(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), until January 1, 2020, an interagency agreement that is in effect pursuant to an amount appropriated to the California Initiative to Advance Precision Medicine, including a contract with the Regents of the University of California or an auxiliary organization of the California State University, may
 include a subcontract not subject to any competitive bidding requirements of this article for the limited purpose of researching or developing precision medicine.

(4) The contract meets the conditions prescribed by the department pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 10348.

(5) The contract has been awarded without advertising and calling for bids pursuant to Section 19404 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

(6) A contract entered into pursuant to Section 14838.5 of the Government Code.

(7) A contract for the development, maintenance, administration, or use of licensing or proficiency testing examinations.

(8) The contract is for services for the operation, maintenance, repair, or
 replacement of specialized equipment at facilities of the State Water Resources Development System, as defined in Section 12931 of the Water Code, and meets the conditions established by the Department of Water Resources for those contracts.

(9) The contract meets the conditions prescribed by the Department of Water Resources for contracts subject to Section 10295.6.

(10) A contract entered into by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training or the Office of Emergency Services solely for the services of instructors for public safety training. For the purpose of this paragraph, “public safety training” includes, but is not limited to, training related to law enforcement, emergency medical response, emergency volunteers, and fire responders.

(11) A contract entered into by the Department of Forestry and Fire
 Protection for the purpose of providing logistical support for large-scale prescribed fire operations, including, but not limited to, meals, lodging, hired equipment, and land use agreements, or any related subcontract.

(c) A state agency that has received less than three bids or proposals on a contract shall document, in a manner prescribed by the department, the names and addresses of the firms or individuals it solicited for bids or proposals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 778, Sec. 3.   (SB 1101)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

10341.

Whenever a contract subject to the provisions of this article is awarded under a procedure which provides for competitive bidding, the bids shall be publicly opened at the time stated in the invitation for bids and the dollar amount of each bid shall be read. No bids shall be considered which have not been received at the place, and prior to the closing time for bids, stated in the invitation for bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10342.

After opening, all bids shall be available for public inspection.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10344.

(a) Contracts subject to the provisions of this article may be awarded under a procedure that makes use of a request for proposal. State agencies that use this procedure shall include in the request for proposal a clear, precise description of the work to be performed or services to be provided, a description of the format that proposals shall follow and the elements they shall contain, the standards the agency will use in evaluating proposals, the date on which proposals are due and the timetable the agency will follow in reviewing and evaluating them.

State agencies that use a procedure that makes use of a request for proposal shall evaluate proposals and award contracts in accordance with the
 provisions of subdivision (b) or (c). No proposals shall be considered that have not been received at the place, and prior to the closing time, stated in the request for proposal.

(b) State agencies that use the evaluation and selection procedure in this subdivision shall include in the request for proposal, in addition to the information required by subdivision (a), a requirement that bidders submit their proposals with the bid price and all cost information in a separate, sealed envelope.

Proposals shall be evaluated and the contract awarded in the following manner:

(1) All proposals received shall be reviewed to determine those that meet the format requirements and the standards specified in the request for proposal.

(2) The sealed envelopes containing the bid price and
 cost information for those proposals that meet the format requirements and standards shall then be publicly opened and read.

(3) The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder meeting the standards.

(c) State agencies that use the evaluation and selection procedure in this subdivision shall include in the request for proposal, in addition to the information required by subdivision (a), a description of the methods that will be used in evaluating and scoring the proposals. Any evaluation and scoring method shall ensure that substantial weight in relationship to all other criteria utilized shall be given to the contract price proposed by the bidder.

Proposals shall be evaluated and the contract awarded in the following manner:

(1) All proposals shall be
 reviewed to determine which meet the format requirements specified in the request for proposal.

(2) All proposals meeting the formal requirements shall then be submitted to an agency evaluation committee which shall evaluate and score the proposals using the methods specified in the request for proposal. All proposals and all evaluation and scoring sheets shall be available for public inspection at the conclusion of the committee scoring process.

(3) The contract shall be awarded to the bidder whose proposal is given the highest score by the evaluation committee.

(d) Nothing in this section shall require the awarding of the contract if no proposals are received containing bids offering a contract price that in the opinion of the state agency is a reasonable price.

(e) (1) In addition to the information required by subdivision (a), a request for proposal for a contract that involves the furnishing of equipment, materials, or supplies shall contain the following statement: 

“It is unlawful for any person engaged in business within this state to sell or use any article or product as a “loss leader” as defined in Section 17030 of the Business and Professions Code.”

(2) On and after March 31, 2010, and until December 31, 2011, if a request for proposal does not contain the statement required by paragraph (1), the awarding agency shall report this error to the department within 30 days of the date the awarding agency discovers this error.

(3) The department shall post in the State Contracting Manual instructions for including the statement required by paragraph (1) in
 all affected contracts.

(4) The statement required by paragraph (1) shall be deemed to be part of a request for proposal even if the statement is inadvertently omitted from the request for proposal.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 490, Sec. 5.   (AB 926)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

10344.1.

The Department of Human Resources, with respect to contracts it enters into for state employees for employee benefits, occupational health and safety, training services, or any combination thereof, shall provide all qualified bidders with a fair opportunity to enter the bidding process, therefore stimulating competition in a manner conducive to sound fiscal practices. The Department of Human Resources shall make available to any member of the public its guidelines for awarding these contracts, and to the extent feasible, implement the objectives set forth in Section 10351.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 665, Sec. 185.   (SB 1308)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

10345.

(a) Whenever a contract is awarded under a procedure providing for competitive bidding, but the contract is not to be awarded to the low bidder, the low bidder shall be given notice five working days prior to the award of the contract by telegram, electronic facsimile transmission, overnight courier, Internet transmission, or personal delivery.

(1) Upon written request by any bidder who has submitted a bid, notice of the proposed award shall be posted in a place accessible by the general public, including any Internet site identified in the invitation for bids at least five working days prior to awarding the contract.

(2) If, prior to the award, any bidder files a protest with the awarding state agency and the department protesting the award of the contract on the grounds that he or she is the lowest responsible bidder meeting the specifications for the contract, the contract shall not be awarded until either the protest has been withdrawn or the department has decided the matter.

(3) Within five days after filing the protest, the protesting bidder shall file with the department and the awarding state agency a full and complete written statement specifying the grounds for the protest.

(b) Contracts awarded under the provisions of Section 10344 shall be awarded only after a notice of the proposed award has been posted in a place accessible by the general public, including any Internet site identified in the request for proposal, for five working days.

(1) If, prior to the award, any bidder files a protest with the awarding state agency and the department against the awarding of the contract, the contract shall not be awarded until either the protest has been withdrawn or the department has decided the matter.

(2) Within five days after filing the protest, the protesting bidder shall file with the department and awarding state agency a full and complete written statement specifying the grounds for the protest. Protests shall be limited to the following grounds:

(A) The state agency failed to follow the procedures specified in either subdivision (b) or (c) of Section 10344.

(B) The state agency failed to apply correctly the standards for reviewing the format requirements or evaluating the proposals as specified in the request for proposal.

(C) The state agency used the evaluation and selection procedure in subdivision (b) of Section 10344, but is proposing to award the contract to a bidder other than the lowest responsible bidder.

(D) The state agency used the evaluation and selection procedure in subdivision (c) of Section 10344, but failed to follow the methods for evaluating and scoring the proposals specified in the request for proposal.

(E) The state agency used the evaluation and selection procedure in subdivision (c) of Section 10344, but is proposing to award the contract to a bidder other than the bidder given the highest score by the state agency evaluation committee.

(c) The department shall establish written procedures for deciding protests under this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 11.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10346.

Contracts may provide for progress payments to contractors for work performed or costs incurred in the performance of the contract. Not less than 10 percent of the contract amount shall be withheld pending final completion of the contract. However, if the contract consists of the performance of separate and distinct tasks, then any funds so withheld with regard to a particular task may be paid upon completion of that task.

No state agency shall make progress payments on a contract unless it first has established procedures, approved by the department, which will ensure that the work or services contracted are being delivered in accordance with the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 12.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10348.

The department shall prescribe the following:

(a) The conditions under which a contract may be awarded without competition, and the methods and criteria which shall be used in determining the reasonableness of contract costs when a contract is awarded without competition.

(b) Any special requirements for evaluating multiple-year contracts which the department deems necessary to protect the financial interest of the state.

(c) For contracts of less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), the conditions under which some or all of the provisions of this article may be waived in order to assist agencies in obtaining services and consultant services in an efficient and timely manner.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 13.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10348.5.

Each state agency shall designate at least one currently existing person or position within the state agency as a contract manager. Every contract manager shall have knowledge of legal contractual arrangements.

(History: Added by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 14.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10349.

The Department of Human Resources shall establish a program for training state agency contracting personnel in contract administration and contract management. The cost of training state agency contracting personnel shall be paid by state agencies out of their appropriations for personnel training. The Department of Human Resources shall, prior to establishing the training program required by this section, consult with the department concerning the training curriculum and the development of a training manual on contract administration.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 665, Sec. 186.   (SB 1308)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

10350.

(a) This section shall apply to contracts awarded by the Department of Rehabilitation to provide rehabilitation services to eligible individuals with disabilities pursuant to Section 361.48 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(b) Notwithstanding the bidding, advertising, and protesting procedures of this chapter, Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), and Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 12120), the Department of Rehabilitation may award a contract described in subdivision (a) without competition or advertising, in accordance with procedures
 for documenting fair and reasonable pricing adopted by the Department of Rehabilitation, in collaboration with the Department of General Services, if the value of the purchase is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and it involves any of the following:

(1) Assistive
 technology devices or services.

(2) An item which is not assistive technology, but is to be incorporated into a new or existing integrated system which does include assistive technology.

(3) An assistive technology device or service that is purchased along with other goods or services and a rehabilitation counselor determines that purchasing the goods or services from an assistive technology vendor is most beneficial for the consumer.

(c) In developing the procedures, the Department of Rehabilitation shall consult with vendors of
 assistive technology goods and services and organizations that advocate for people with disabilities, and it shall give primary emphasis on ensuring the timely delivery of products identified to meet the individual needs of consumers.

(d) (1) The Department of Rehabilitation shall submit a report to the Legislature, prior to January 1, 2029, regarding contracts entered into pursuant to the procedures
 authorized by this section. 

(2) The report shall, at a minimum, list, for each contract entered into, the contract or purchase order number, a brief description of the goods or services, the contractor name, the date of the acquisition, and the amount paid. Purchases for the same consumer shall be grouped together.

(3) The report shall describe the efficiencies or improvements that resulted from having awarded contracts pursuant to the alternative procedures authorized by this section so as to provide the Legislature information necessary to determine the effectiveness of those procedures. 

(4) (A) The requirement for submitting a report imposed under paragraph (1) shall become inoperative on
 January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 10231.5 of the Government Code.

(B) A report to be submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(e) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Assistive technology device” means any item, piece of equipment, software or product system that is designed to increase, maintain, or improve the functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities, including, but not limited to:

(A) Low-tech devices such as a reacher, large grip pen, or independent living aid.

(B) High-tech equipment such as specialized computer hardware and accessories such as custom switches, keyboards, and mouse alternatives.

(C) Specialized computer software such as screen-readers, communication software, or tools to help with reading and writing.

(D) Inclusive or specialized learning materials and curriculum aids.

(E) Specialized curricular software.

(F) Other items such as wheelchairs, height adjustable desks, power lifts, eye-gaze, head trackers, and environmental controls.

(2) “Assistive technology service” means a service which directly assists an individual with a
 disability in the selection, acquisition, or use of an assistive technology device. These services include, but are not limited to, evaluation, training, set up and installation, system configuration and testing, and technical support. 

(3) “Integrated system” means a collection of equipment or software which is designed to work together as a system to meet the disability-related needs of a Department of Rehabilitation consumer. This includes, but is not limited to, situations where a computer is adapted through use of specialized software and peripherals. Some of the necessary components of the system may be generic equipment or software such as cables, scanners, or printers, so long as the system includes one or more assistive technology devices.

(f) This section
 shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 253, Sec. 1.   (AB 3193)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

10351.

(a) The department shall exempt from its approval contracts under one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) that any state agency awards if the state agency does all of the following:

(1) Designates an agency officer as responsible and directly accountable for the agency’s contracting program.

(2) Establishes written policies and procedures and a management system that will ensure the state agency’s contracting activities comply with applicable provisions of law and regulations and that it has demonstrated the ability to carry out these policies and procedures and to implement the management system.

(3) Establishes a plan for ensuring
 that contracting personnel are adequately trained in contract administration and contract management.

(4) Conducts an audit every three years of the contracting program and reports to the department as it may require.

(5) Establishes procedures for reporting to the department and the Legislature on such contracts as the Legislature may require in the Budget Act.

(b) Any state agency may request the department to exempt from its approval classes or types of contracts under this section. When the department receives a request but refuses to grant the exemption, it shall state in writing the reasons for the refusal. It is the intent of the Legislature that the department shall actively implement the provisions of this section and shall exempt from its approval as wide a range of classes or types of contracts as is
 consistent with proper administrative controls and the best interests of the state.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 997, Sec. 20.   (AB 179)   Effective September 30, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10352.

(a) The department shall conduct a quality control review of the audit of the contracting program required by Section 10351.

(b) The exemption provided by Section 10351 may be withdrawn by the department at any time that the department finds that the state agency to which the exemption has been granted is out of compliance with the requirements of Section 10351. In any case where the exemption is withdrawn, the department shall state in writing, the reasons for the withdrawal and shall specify the actions the state agency is required to take before the exemption again may be requested.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1044, Sec. 4.   Effective September 19, 1990.)
-------------------------------------------

10353.

A contract in an amount in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) that is governed by the provisions of this part shall contain a provision requiring the contractor to give priority consideration in filling vacancies in positions funded by the contract to qualified recipients of aid under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 11200) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, in accordance with Article 3.9 (commencing with Section 11349) of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

This section and Article 3.9 (commencing with Section 11349) of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code shall not be applicable to any contracts for a project as defined in Section 10105.

This section and Article 3.9 (commencing with Section 11349) of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code shall not be construed so as to do any of the following:

(a) Interfere with or create a violation of the terms of valid collective bargaining agreements.

(b) Require the contractor to hire an unqualified recipient of aid.

(c) Interfere with, or create a violation of, any federal affirmative action obligation of a contractor for hiring disabled veterans or veterans of the Vietnam era.

(d) Interfere with, or create a violation of, the requirements of Section 12990 of the Government Code.

If waivers are deemed necessary to implement this section and Article 3.9 (commencing with Section 11349) of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, and if the State Department of Social Services has not obtained these waivers from the federal government by March 1, 1985, the department shall report on the barriers to the waivers and the expected date of waiver approval.

This section is not applicable to consulting services contracts.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 17.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10353.5.

(a) Any contract for legal services shall contain the following provisions:

(1) The contractor shall agree to adhere to legal cost and billing guidelines designated by the state agency.

(2) The contractor shall adhere to litigation plans designated by the state agency.

(3) The contractor shall adhere to case phasing of activities designated by the state agency.

(4) The contractor shall submit and adhere to legal budgets as designated by the state agency.

(5) The contractor shall maintain legal malpractice insurance in an amount not less than the amount designated by the state agency.

(6) The contractor shall submit to legal bill audits and law firm audits if requested by the state agency. The audits may be conducted by employees or designees of the state agency or by any legal cost control providers retained by the state agency for that purpose.

(b) A contractor may be required to submit to a legal cost and utilization review, as determined by the state agency.

(c) As used in this section, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Legal bill audits,” means an evaluation and analysis of the reasonableness of particular legal bills submitted to a state agency for reimbursement.

(2) “Law firm audit,” means a review of law firm files applicable to legal services provided to a state agency for a particular time period.

(3) “Legal cost and utilization review,” means a review performed by the state agency or its legal cost provider of the utilization and billing practices of a contractor for the purpose of developing or revising guidelines to be followed prospectively by the contractor in representing the state agency.

(4) “Contract for legal service,” shall include any contract between a state agency and any law firm, professional corporation, law firm partnership, or individual attorney to perform legal work on behalf of the state agency.

(5) “Legal cost control provider,” means any corporation, professional corporation, partnership, or sole proprietorship which possesses the following qualifications:

(A) Maintains an office in the state.

(B)Is authorized to do business in the state.

(C) Has existed as a legal cost control provider for at least two complete, successive years, as evidenced by filings of tax returns.

(D) All legal cost control services are provided by attorneys.

(E) All attorneys providing the legal cost control services are admitted to practice in this state.

(F) All attorneys have been admitted to practice in this state for a minimum of five years prior to the performance of any legal cost control services for any state agency.

(G) Any legal cost control provider shall maintain professional liability insurance in the amount designated by the state agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 734, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------

10365.5.

(a) No person, firm, or subsidiary thereof who has been awarded a consulting services contract may submit a bid for, nor be awarded a contract for, the provision of services, procurement of goods or supplies, or any other related action which is required, suggested, or otherwise deemed appropriate in the end product of the consulting services contract. 

(b) Subdivision (a) does not apply to any person, firm, or subsidiary thereof who is awarded a subcontract of a consulting services contract which amounts to no more than 10 percent of the total monetary value of the consulting services contract. 

(c) Subdivisions (a) and (b) do not apply to consulting services contracts subject to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1991, Ch. 1091, Sec. 123.)
-------------------------------------------

10367.

(a) Each contractor shall be advised in writing on the standard contract form that his or her performance, or the firm’s performance under the contract will be evaluated.

(b) The department shall use standardized evaluation forms and make them available to every state agency. Each state agency shall use post-evaluation forms to evaluate all consulting services contracts totaling five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more.

The department shall devise standards and criteria for the post-evaluation forms. These standardized post-evaluation forms shall consist of a form for assessing the need and value of the consulting services contract to the state, and a form for assessing the usability and utility of the completed consulting services contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 30.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10369.

(a) Each state agency shall conduct a post-evaluation, by completing the post-evaluation form, of each consulting services contract totaling five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more that it executes.

(b) The agency shall evaluate the performance of the contractor in doing the work or delivering the services for which the contract was awarded. The agency shall report on all of the following:

(1) Whether the contracted work or services were completed as specified in the contract, and reasons for and amount of any cost overruns or delayed completions.

(2) Whether the contracted work or services met the quality standards specified in the contract.

(3) Whether the contractor fulfilled all the requirements of the contract and if not, in what ways the contractor did not fulfill the contract.

(4) Factors outside the control of the contractor that caused difficulties in contractor performance.

(5) Other information the department may require.

(6) How the contract results and findings will be utilized to meet the agency goals.

(c) If the contractor’s performance was judged unsatisfactory on any of the factors specified in subdivision (b) and was not mitigated by circumstances specified in paragraph (4) of subdivision (b), the evaluation shall be considered unsatisfactory for the purposes of subdivisions (e) and (f).

(d) The post-evaluation shall be prepared within 60 days of the completion of the contract.

(e) Post-evaluations shall remain on file at the offices of the awarding state agency for a period of 36 months following contract completion. If the contractor did not satisfactorily perform the work or service specified in the contract, the state agency conducting the evaluation shall place one copy of the evaluation form in the state agency’s contract file and send one copy of the form to the department within five working days of the completion of the evaluation.

(f) Upon filing an unsatisfactory evaluation with the department, the state agency shall notify and send a copy of the evaluation to the contractor within 15 days. The contractor shall have the right, within 30 days after receipt, to submit to the awarding state agency and the department, a written response statement that shall be filed with the evaluation in the state agency’s contract file and in the department.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 31.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10370.

The evaluations and contractor responses on file with the state agencies and the department shall not be public records. The department shall act as a central depository for all state agencies making evaluation or desiring information on a contractor’s record with the state and shall send a copy of any post-evaluation report and response to the contracting manager or contracting officer of any state agency upon request. The post-evaluations and contractor responses shall remain on file for a period of 36 months only.

Failure by the awarding state agency to send a negative post-evaluation to the department may be grounds for rejection of future contracts or modification of exemptions.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 32.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------

10371.

The following provisions shall apply to all consulting services contracts:

(a) Each state agency shall, regardless of the fiscal amount involved, use available private resources only when the quality of work of private resources is of at least equal quality compared with the state agency operated resources.

(b) Each state agency shall, prior to signing a consulting services contract totaling five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more, prepare detailed criteria and a mandatory progress schedule for the performance of the contract and shall require each selected contractor to provide a detailed analysis of the costs of performing the contract.

(c) Except in an emergency, no consulting services contract shall be commenced prior to formal approval by the department or, if the department’s approval is not otherwise required, by the director of the state agency. No payments for any consulting services contract shall be made prior to this approval of the award.

For the purpose of this subdivision an “emergency” means an instance, as determined by the department, where the use of contracted services appeared to be reasonably necessary but time did not permit the obtaining of prior formal approval of the contract.

(d) No consulting services contractor shall be awarded a contract totaling five thousand dollars ($5,000), or more, unless all of the following apply:

(1) The state agency has reviewed any contractor evaluation form
 on file with the department in accordance with Section 10369.

(2) Each state agency shall require that a completed resumé for each contract participant who will exercise a major administrative role or major policy or consultant role, as identified by the contractor, be attached to the contract for public record and is made a part of the contract.

(3) The department shall notify a state agency seeking approval of a proposed contract within 10 working days if it has a negative evaluation in its files on a previous contract or contracts awarded to this contractor.

(e) The department may require special evaluation procedures for multiyear contracts or for contracts calling for special evaluation procedures beyond the post-evaluation.

(f) Any contract for
 consulting services awarded without competition shall be listed in the California State Contracts Register. The information contained in the listing shall include the contract recipient, amount, and services covered. The requirement of this subdivision shall not apply to any contract awarded without competition executed with an expert witness for purposes of civil litigation in a pending case.

(g) The department shall have the duty to restrict or terminate the authority of a state agency to enter into consultant contracts if the state agency has consistently avoided the proper preparation, retention, or submission of post-evaluation forms, as required by this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 997, Sec. 21.   (AB 179)   Effective September 30, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10372.

On and after January 1, 2024, when seeking to award a contract for commercial rental car services, the department shall develop criteria to evaluate bidders, at least in part, based on the number of zero-emission vehicles or plug-in hybrid electric vehicles in their rental car fleet.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 360, Sec. 2.   (SB 1010)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10381.

(a) The department shall ensure that all state agencies are kept fully informed of the department’s plans and procedures for implementing the provisions of this article. The department shall make information available on implementation procedures to all interested parties.

(b) The department shall ensure that every consultant services contract contains standard language that fully informs the contractor of his or her duties, obligations, and rights under this article, and any additional contractor rights and obligations which the department determines should be included.

(c) Each consulting services contract shall have a provision for settlement of contract disputes.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 759, Sec. 43.   Effective January 1, 2001.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 5.5. Federal Surplus Personal Property [10383. - 10383.8.]

10383.

The Department of General Services is hereby designated as the agency for the State of California responsible for distribution of federal surplus personal property, excepting food commodities, in accordance with subdivision (j) of Section 203 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. Sec. 484), as amended, and succeeds to and is vested with the duties, purposes, responsibilities, and jurisdiction heretofore exercised by the State Department of Education with respect to the distribution of federal surplus personal property, excepting the duties, purposes, responsibilities, and jurisdiction exercised by the State Department of Education with respect to the distribution of federal surplus food commodities.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.1.

The department shall cooperate with the federal government and its agencies in securing the expeditious and equitable distribution of surplus personal property of the federal government, excepting food commodities, to eligible institutions in California, assist those institutions in securing that property, and do all things necessary to the execution of its powers and duties as the state agency for the distribution of federal personal surplus property, excepting food commodities, in accordance with subdivision (j) of Section 203 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, as amended.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.2.

The department may enter into cooperative agreements with, and may provide for utilization by, federal agencies, with or without payment or reimbursement, of the property, facilities, personnel, and services of the department in carrying out the purposes of this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.3.

The Director of General Services may create a committee to serve as an advisory body to the department to ensure that distribution of federal surplus personal property to eligible recipients will be accomplished fairly and equitably. In the event that such a committee is created, the membership shall be representative of a cross section of those institutions that are eligible recipients, and the members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their advisory function.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.4.

The department shall develop a detailed state plan of operation in accordance with subdivision (j) of Section 203 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, as amended, and the Governor shall certify and submit the plan to the Administrator of the Federal General Services Administration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.5.

The cash resources of the Surplus Property - Hardware Program from surplus-personal property transferred to this state in accordance with the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. Sec. 484(j)) shall be deposited in the Service Revolving Fund in the State Treasury, created pursuant to Section 16420 of the Government Code. All costs of the Department of General Services attributable to the distribution of surplus personal property pursuant to this article shall be paid from the Service Revolving Fund.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1988, Ch. 207, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.6.

The Department of General Services shall have the possession and control of all records, papers, offices, equipment, supplies, moneys, funds, appropriations, land, and other property real or personal held for the benefit or use of the State Department of Education in the performance of the duties, powers, purposes, responsibilities, and jurisdiction pertaining to surplus personal property, excepting food commodities, that on the operative date of this section are vested in the Department of General Services.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.7.

All officers and employees of the State Department of Education as mutually agreed by the Department of General Services to be on the operative date of this section serving in the state civil service, other than as temporary employees, and engaged in the performance of the function vested in the Department of General Services by this article shall be transferred to the Department of General Services. The status, position, and rights of such persons shall not be affected by the transfer and shall be retained by them as officers and employees of the Department of General Services pursuant to the State Civil Service Act, except as to positions exempt from civil service.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------

10383.8.

The department may make all rules and regulations consistent with the law for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this article. Those rules and regulations shall be adopted, amended, or repealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 196, Sec. 8.   Effective June 13, 1984.   Operative July 1, 1984, by Sec. 8.5 of Ch. 196.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6. Purchase of Federal Surplus Property [10385. - 10389.]

10385.

The department may purchase, lease or otherwise acquire from the federal government or any agency thereof for use of state agencies, surplus real property, including buildings, fixtures, and equipment situated thereon, whenever in the department’s judgment the purchase or acquisition and the terms and conditions thereof are in the best interests of the state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10386.

Any and all negotiations with the federal government or its agencies for or in connection with the purchase or acquisition of such property, and all activities, functions and responsibilities pertaining thereto, are hereby vested in and shall be assumed and conducted exclusively by the department. No other state officer or agency shall, except on the authorization of the department, negotiate with the federal government or its agencies for or in connection with the purchase or acquisition of such property. Any state agency may inspect such property to determine whether the same would be useful in the performance of its duties and may make recommendations to the department concerning the same.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10387.

The department shall do all of the following:

(1) Keep in constant touch with federal agencies charged with the sale or disposition of federal property and secure from them full details as to the nature and availability of the property and the terms and conditions under which it can be purchased or acquired.

(2) Transmit information thus secured to all state agencies in order that they may possess complete and up-to-date information as to the nature and selling price of available property.

(3) Prescribe procedures consistent with this article to be followed by state agencies in requisitioning and paying for the property and inform them of the procedures.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10388.

Unless otherwise prescribed by the department, state agencies desiring to purchase or acquire federal property shall submit their estimates or requisitions therefor to the department, and shall pay for the property, in accordance with existing laws governing state purchases.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10389.

This article shall not apply to the Trustees of the California State University.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 843, Sec. 8.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.5. State Surplus Personal Property [10389.1. - 10389.2.]

10389.1.

The Department of General Services, if feasible and consistent with existing law, shall first offer appropriate state surplus personal property to school districts prior to offering that property to the public, except for property more appropriately suited for public safety uses. The department may offer school districts state surplus personal property at less than fair market value, if it is determined by the Director of General Services to be in the best interests of the state. The department shall develop policies and procedures for the implementation of this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 731, Sec. 1.2.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

10389.2.

(a) The department’s policies and procedures regarding the disposition of state surplus computers, laptops, monitors, and related computer equipment shall do all of the following:

(1) Facilitate the disposition of state surplus computers to further the state policy of bridging the digital divide, as described in subdivision (d) of Section 709 of the Public Utilities Code.

(2) Authorize nonprofit entities that, in partnership with a school district, operate a public computer center to further the state policy of bridging the digital divide, as described in subdivision (d) of Section 709 of the Public Utilities Code, to be eligible for
 receipt of state surplus computers under Section 10389.1 and through approved disposition directly from a state agency.

(3) Include a procedure enabling state agencies with surplus computers to ascertain whether the nonprofit entities described in paragraph (2) are interested in receiving those surplus computers. The procedure shall include a preference for nonprofit entities within the same geographic region as the state agency in order to minimize transportation and disposition costs.

(4) Require that state agency documentation of the disposition of surplus computers include a certification that all confidential, sensitive, and personal information was removed from the computers prior to disposition.

(5) Require any nonprofit organization that obtains a computer from
 the department, pursuant to this article, to use the computer only for operating a public computer center and to prohibit the resale of that computer.

(b) The department, in collaboration with the California Technology Agency, shall promote increased awareness among state agency officials of the requirement to remove from all state surplus computers all confidential, sensitive, and personal information prior to any disposition of those computers.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 251, Sec. 1.   (SB 493)   Effective September 6, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7.6. Recycled Oil Markets [10405. - 10409.]

10405.

The following definitions govern the construction of this article:

(a) “Department” means the State Department of Health Services.

(b) “Industrial oil” means any compressor, turbine, or bearing oil, hydraulic oil, metal-working oil, or refrigeration oil.

(c) “Lubricating oil” means any oil intended for use in an internal combustion crankcase, transmission, gearbox, or differential or an automobile, bus, truck, vessel, plane, train, heavy equipment, or machinery powered by an internal combustion engine.

(d) “Procuring agency” means any state agency or any person contracting with that agency with respect to work performed under a contract for lubricating oil or industrial oil.

(e) “Recycled oil” means recycled oil, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 25250.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

(f) “Used oil” means used oil, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 25250.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

(g) “Virgin oil” means oil which has been refined from crude oil and which has not been used or contaminated with impurities.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1226, Sec. 3.   Note: See changes set forth in Governor's Reorg. Plan 1 of 1991.)
-------------------------------------------

10406.

Every procuring agency shall continuously review and revise its procedures and specifications for the purchase of lubricating oil and industrial oil to eliminate any exclusion of recycled oils and any requirement that oils be manufactured from virgin materials. This section does not prohibit a local agency from purchasing virgin oil products for exclusive use in vehicles whose warranties expressly prohibit the use of products containing recycled oil.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 408, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

10407.

Every procuring agency shall require that purchases of lubricating oil and industrial oil be made from the seller whose oil product contains the greater percentage of recycled oil, unless the procuring agency certifies that a specific oil product containing recycled oil is any of the following:

(1) Not reasonably available within a reasonable period of time.

(2) Unable to meet the reasonable performance standards of the procuring agency, including any warranty requirement.

(3) Available only at a cost greater than the cost of available virgin oil products.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1226, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10408.

(a) Every procuring agency shall establish and maintain an affirmative program for procuring oils containing the maximum content of recycled oil.

(b) An affirmative program shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following:

(1) The placement of descriptions of the preference for recycled oil products in publications used to solicit bids from suppliers.

(2) Description of the recycled oil procurement program at bidders’ conferences.

(3) Discussion of the preference program in lubricating oil and industrial oil procurement solicitations or invitations to bid.

(4) Efforts to inform industry trade associations about the preference program.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1226, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10409.

Every local agency, as defined in Section 17518 of the Government Code, shall purchase lubricating oil and industrial oil from the seller whose oil product contains the greater percentage of recycled oil, if the availability, fitness, quality, and price of the recycled oil product is otherwise equal to, or better than, virgin oil products. This section shall not prohibit a local agency from purchasing virgin oil products for exclusive use in vehicles whose warranties expressly prohibit the use of products containing recycled oil.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1101, Sec. 2.   Effective September 29, 1992.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 8. Conflict of Interest [10410. - 10413.]

10410.

No officer or employee in the state civil service or other appointed state official shall engage in any employment, activity, or enterprise from which the officer or employee receives compensation or in which the officer or employee has a financial interest and which is sponsored or funded, or sponsored and funded, by any state agency or department through or by a state contract unless the employment, activity, or enterprise is required as a condition of the officer’s or employee’s regular state employment. No officer or employee in the state civil service shall contract on his or her own individual behalf as an independent contractor with any state agency to provide services or goods.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1984, Ch. 154, Sec. 12.)
-------------------------------------------

10411.

(a) No retired, dismissed, separated, or formerly employed person of any state agency or department employed under the state civil service or otherwise appointed to serve in state government may enter into a contract in which he or she engaged in any of the negotiations, transactions, planning, arrangements, or any part of the decisionmaking process relevant to the contract while employed in any capacity by any state agency or department. The prohibition of this subdivision shall apply to a person only during the two-year period beginning on the date the person left state employment.

(b) For a period of 12 months following the date of his or her retirement, dismissal, or separation from state service, no person employed under state civil service or otherwise appointed to serve in state government may enter into a contract with any state agency, if he or she was employed by that state agency in a policymaking position in the same general subject area as the proposed contract within the 12-month period prior to his or her retirement, dismissal, or separation. The prohibition of this subdivision shall not apply to a contract requiring the person’s services as an expert witness in a civil case or to a contract for the continuation of an attorney’s services on a matter with which he or she was involved prior to leaving state service.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 22, Sec. 156.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

10412.

Each contractor who enters into a state contract with the state for ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more, shall be assigned an identification number by the department. Each contractor who has been assigned a number, shall list it on each contract he or she enters into with the state, regardless of the amount of the contract. In the case of a corporation or firm, the president’s assigned number shall be used exclusively on each contract. The assigned number shall remain unchanged regardless of future name changes.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10413.

Notwithstanding Section 10410, an employee or state officer, not including a member of the board of directors, of a district agricultural association formed pursuant to Part 3 (commencing with Section 3801) of Division 3 of the Food and Agricultural Code, subject to the approval of the board of directors of that association, may receive compensation or have a financial interest as described in Section 10410 for purposes of contracting
 or employment with another district agricultural association. Nothing in this section shall preclude the applicability of Sections 1090, 18000, and 19990 of the Government Code to officers and employees of a district agricultural association.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 215, Sec. 1.   (AB 2396)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 9. Remedies and Penalties [10420. - 10426.]

10420.

Every contract or other transaction entered in violation of any provision of this chapter is void, unless the violation is technical or nonsubstantive.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10421.

The state, or any person acting on behalf of the state, may bring a civil action seeking a determination by the Superior Court that a contract or other transaction has been entered in violation of any provision of this chapter. If the court finds substantial evidence of such a violation, it may issue a temporary injunction to prevent any further dealings upon the contract or other transaction, pending a final determination on the merits of the case. If the action results in a final determination that the contract or other transaction has been entered in violation of this chapter, it shall be void, and the state or person bringing the action shall be awarded costs and attorney’s fees. This section shall not be construed to permit an award of costs and attorney fees to the person or entity contracting or otherwise transacting with the state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10422.

Any officer or employee of the department who corruptly performs any official act under this chapter to the injury of the state is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10423.

Any person contracting with the state by oral or written contract who corruptly permits the violation of any contract made under this chapter is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10424.

Persons convicted under Section 10422 or 10423 are also liable to the state for double the amount the state may have lost, or be liable to lose by reason of the acts made crimes by this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10425.

Willful violation of any other provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1231, Sec. 4.   Effective September 30, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

10426.

(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally disclose proprietary information obtained in the negotiation, execution, or performance of a consulting services contract, as defined in Section 10335.5, or an information technology contract, as defined in Section 11702 of the Government Code, with a state agency when the contracting party knew or should have known that the disclosure was likely to cause harm.

(b) A violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted by the Attorney General or by a local district attorney in the district in which the disclosure took place.

(c) (1) For the purposes of this section “proprietary information” shall include any information agreed by the contracting parties to be proprietary or any information that is designated by a contracting state agency to be proprietary. A contracting state agency shall specifically identify in the contract any information that is considered to be proprietary. The state agency shall make this designation only in cases where the state agency has reason to believe that the release of this information poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the state agency has reason to believe that the contracting party intends to sell the information. If the state agency makes a designation of proprietary information subsequent to the execution of the contract, the state agency shall make a good faith effort to amend the contract to incorporate the subsequent designation of proprietary information. A contracting state agency shall provide written notification to a contracting party of any information that, subsequent to the execution of the contract, is identified to be proprietary. A contracting party is not in violation of this section if that party discloses information prior to the receipt of the written notification.

(2) Any information that is required to be released or disclosed by a contracting party pursuant to a legal requirement, including an order of a court or regulatory agency, shall not be considered a violation of this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1097, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 10. Exemptions [10430. - 10430.]

10430.

This chapter does not apply to any of the following:

(a) The Regents of the University of California and the Trustees of the California State University, except that Article 9 (commencing with Section 10420) shall apply to the Trustees of the California State University.

(b) (1) Transactions covered under Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), except that Sections 10295.3, 10295.35, 10295.4, 10296, 10365.5, 10410,
 10411, and Article 13 (commencing with Section 10475) shall apply to all transactions under that chapter.

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), Section 10365.5 shall not apply to incidental advice or suggestions made outside of the scope of a consulting services contract.

(3) (A) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), Section 10365.5 shall not apply to a contract that is part of a single competitive procurement conducted in more than one stage for information technology goods or services, when the Director of the Department of General Services and the Director of Technology determine that there is no conflict of
 interest under Section 10365.5 and that it is in the best interest of the state to utilize this procurement method. Nothing in this section shall preclude the applicability of Section 12112 to this procurement method.

(B) The Department of General Services shall annually submit a report on its Internet Web site describing each determination granted pursuant to subparagraph (A), listing the basis for the determination, and disclosing the total amount of money paid or to be paid to the contractor under the contract that was the subject of the determination. The department shall provide notice to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee within 30 days of the posting of the report.

(C) For purposes of this paragraph, “information technology” means information technology goods or services, or both, as appropriate.

(c) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any entity exempted from Section 10295. However, the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges shall be governed by this chapter, except as provided in Sections 10295, 10335, and 10389. The Department of Water Resources shall be governed by this chapter, except as provided in Sections 10295.6, 10304.1, 10335, and 10340.

(d) Transactions covered under Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(e) Except as provided for in subdivision (c), members of boards or commissions who receive no payment other than payment for each meeting of the board or commission, payment for preparatory time, and payment for per diem.

(f) The emergency purchase of protective vests for correctional peace officers whose
 duties require routine contact with state prison inmates. This subdivision shall remain operative only until January 1, 1987.

(g) Spouses of state officers or employees and individuals and entities that employ spouses of state officers and employees, that are vendored to provide services to regional center clients pursuant to Section 4648 of the Welfare and Institutions Code if the vendor of services, in that capacity, does not receive any material financial benefit, distinguishable from the benefit to the public generally, from any governmental decision made by the state officer or employee.

(h) Subject to the approval of the Director of Developmental Services, or his or her designee, a state employee of the department who is qualified to provide necessary services for regional center consumers and has entered into a contract with a regional center for the purpose of developing
 regional center services. The state employee shall terminate employment with any state agency or department before providing services funded by the state, as specified in Section 10410, to one or more regional center consumers. A contract entered into by a regional center and a state employee, in his or her capacity as a private citizen, to develop regional center services does not constitute a state contract within the meaning of Section 1090 of the Government Code. Accordingly, the state employee has no financial interest in a state contract under these circumstances.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 220, Sec. 1.   (AB 2764)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 12. Minority Business Participation [10470. - 10474.]

10470.

As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “Awarding department” means any state agency, department, governmental entity, or other officer of an entity empowered by law to enter into contracts on behalf of the State of California.

(b) “Contract” includes any agreement or joint development agreement to provide labor, services, materials, supplies, or equipment in the performance of a contract, franchise, concession, or lease granted, let, or awarded for and on behalf of the State of California.

(c) “Contractor” means any person or persons, firm, partnership, corporation, or combination thereof which submits a bid and enters into a contract with a representative of a state agency, department, governmental entity, or other officer empowered by law to enter into contracts on behalf of the State of California.

(d) “Goal” means a numerically expressed objective which awarding departments and contractors are required to make efforts to achieve.

(e) “Minority business enterprise” means a business concern which is all of the following:

(1) At least 51 percent owned by one or more minorities, or in the case of a publicly owned business, at least 51 percent of the stock of which is owned by one or more minorities.

(2) Managed by, and the daily business operations are controlled by, one or more minorities.

(3) A domestic corporation with its home office located in the United States. 

(f) “Women business enterprise” means a business concern which is all of the following:

(1) At least 51 percent owned by a woman or, in the case of a publicly owned business, at least 51 percent of the stock of which is owned by one or more women.

(2) Managed by, and the daily business operations are controlled by, one or more women.

(3) A domestic corporation with its home office located in the United States.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1450, Sec. 8.5.)
-------------------------------------------

10471.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all contracts awarded pursuant to Section 2910 of the Penal Code or Section 1753.3 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by any state agency, department, officer, or governmental entity for construction, professional services, materials, supplies, equipment, alteration, repair, or improvement shall have statewide participation goals of not less than 15 percent for minority business enterprises, and not less than 5 percent for women business enterprises. These goals are also applicable to the overall dollar amount expended each year by the awarding department designated for those purposes.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1450, Sec. 8.5.)
-------------------------------------------

10472.

In awarding contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, the awarding department shall consider the responsiveness of a bidder to minority business enterprise and women business enterprise goals set forth in Section 10471.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, 4th Ex. Sess., Ch. 19, Sec. 4.   Effective July 28, 2009.)
-------------------------------------------

10473.

(a) Each awarding department shall establish a method for monitoring compliance with the minority business enterprise and women business enterprise goals required in this article.

(b) Each awarding department shall adopt rules and regulations for purposes of implementing this article. Emergency regulations consistent with the requirements of this article may be adopted without the review and approval of the Office of Administrative Law if they are adopted within 90 days of the effective date of this article.

(c) In implementing the requirements of this article, the awarding department shall utilize existing resources such as the Office of Small and Minority Business, the Minority Business Development Agency, and the federal Small Business Administration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1450, Sec. 8.5.)
-------------------------------------------

10474.

Commencing on January 1, 1989, and on January 1st of each year thereafter, each awarding department shall submit a report to the Legislature and the Governor on the level of participation by minority or women business enterprises in contracts identified in this article. If the established goals are not being met, the awarding department shall report the reasons for its inability to achieve these goals and shall identify remedial steps to be undertaken.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1450, Sec. 8.5.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 13. Darfur Contracting Act of 2008 [10475. - 10490.]

10475.

The Legislature hereby finds and declares all of the following:

(a) On September 21, 2004, in addressing the United Nations General Assembly, President George W. Bush affirmed the Secretary of State’s finding and stated, “At this hour, the world is witnessing terrible suffering and horrible crimes in the Darfur region of Sudan, crimes my government has concluded are genocide.”

(b) The federal government has imposed sanctions against the Government of Sudan since 1997. These sanctions are monitored through the United States Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).

(c) Since 1993, the United States Secretary of State has determined Sudan is a country whose government has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism, thereby restricting United States assistance, defense exports and sales, and financial and other transactions with the Government of Sudan.

(d) On December 31, 2007, President George W. Bush signed the Sudan Accountability and Divestment Act (Public Law 110-174). The legislation passed the Senate and the House of Representatives unanimously. That act authorizes state and local governments to adopt policies to divest from, and prohibit, contracts with problematic companies operating in Sudan’s oil, power, mineral, and military sectors. That act also prohibits the federal government from contracting with these companies.

(e) On September 25, 2006, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger stated, “Divesting will show our defiance of a government that murders” when signing Assembly Bill 2941 into law enabling the nation’s two largest pension funds to divest from investments in Sudan.

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: Section 10480 suggests conditions for future repeal action.)
-------------------------------------------

10476.

As used in this article, the following definition applies:

“Scrutinized company” means a company in Sudan that is involved in power production activities, mineral extraction activities, oil-related activities, or the production of military equipment, but excludes a company that can demonstrate any of the following:

(a) Its business operations are conducted under contract directly and exclusively with the regional government of southern Sudan.

(b) Its business operations are conducted under a license from the Office of Foreign Assets Control, or are expressly exempted under federal law from the requirement to be conducted under such a license.

(c) Its business operations consist of providing goods or services to marginalized populations of Sudan.

(d) Its business operations exclusively consist of providing goods or services to an internationally recognized peacekeeping force or humanitarian organization.

(e) Its business operations consist of providing goods or services that are used only to promote health or education.

(f) Its business operations with the Government of Sudan will be voluntarily suspended for the entire duration of the contract for goods or services for which they have bid on, or submitted a proposal for, a contract with a state agency.

(g) It has adopted, publicized, and is implementing a formal plan to cease business operations within one year and to refrain from conducting any new business operations.

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: Section 10480 suggests conditions for future repeal action.)
-------------------------------------------

10477.

(a) A scrutinized company is ineligible to, and shall not, bid on or submit a proposal for a contract with a state agency for goods or services.

(b) (1) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the Director of General Services may permit a scrutinized company, on a case-by-case basis, to bid on or submit a proposal for a contract with a state agency for goods or services, if it is in the best interests of the state to permit the scrutinized company to bid on or submit a proposal for one or more contracts with a state agency for goods or services.

(2) In making this determination, the Director of General Services may utilize the following resources:

(A) Verification by an independent third party or nonprofit organization that a company is doing either of the following:

(i) Undertaking significant humanitarian efforts in conjunction with an international organization, the Government of Sudan, the regional government of southern Sudan, or a nonprofit organization to benefit one or more marginalized populations of Sudan. The party or organization providing the verification or an independent third party must evaluate and certify that the significant humanitarian efforts are substantial in relation to the company’s Sudan business operations.

(ii) Through engagement with the Government of Sudan, materially improving conditions for the genocidally victimized population in Darfur.

(B) Consideration of a National Interest Waiver issued by the President of the United States excluding a company from the federal contract prohibitions provisions of the Sudan Accountability and Divestment Act (Public Law 110-174).

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: Section 10480 suggests conditions for future repeal action.)
-------------------------------------------

10478.

(a) A state agency shall require a company that submits a bid or proposal with respect to a contract for goods or services, that currently or within the previous three years has had business activities or other operations outside of the United States, to certify that the company is not a scrutinized company.

(b) A state agency shall not require a company that submits a bid or proposal with respect to a contract for goods or services, and that currently or within the previous three years has had business activities or other operations outside of the United States, to certify that the company is not a scrutinized company, if the company has obtained permission to bid on or submit a proposal for a contract with a state agency for goods or services pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 10477.

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: Section 10480 suggests conditions for future repeal action.)
-------------------------------------------

10479.

(a) If the Department of General Services determines that a company has submitted a false certification under Section 10478, the company shall be subject to all of the following:

(1) The company is liable for a civil penalty in an amount that is equal to the greater of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) or twice the amount of the contract for which a bid or proposal was submitted.

(2) The state agency or the Department of General Services may terminate the contract with the company.

(3) The company is ineligible to, and shall not, bid on a state contract for a period of not less than three years from the date the state agency determines that the company submitted the false certification.

(b) The Department of General Services shall report to the Attorney General the name of the company that the Department of General Services determined had submitted a false certification under Section 10478, together with its information as to the false certification, and the Attorney General shall determine whether to bring a civil action against the company. The company shall pay all costs and fees the plaintiff incurred in a civil action, including costs incurred by the state agency and the Department of General Services for investigations that led to the finding of the false certification and all costs and fees incurred by the Attorney General.

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: Section 10480 suggests conditions for future repeal action.)
-------------------------------------------

10480.

This act shall be repealed upon affirmative action of the Legislature. Provided, that in determining whether to repeal this act, by way of suggestion and guidance only and without binding or in any way inhibiting the discretion of future sessions of the Legislature, it is submitted that the occurrence of any of the following should be construed and deemed to be a basis for repealing this act:

(a) The Congress or President of the United States declares the Darfur genocide has been halted for at least 12 months.

(b) The United States revokes all sanctions imposed against the Government of Sudan.

(c) The President of the United States has certified to Congress that the Government of Sudan has honored its commitments to do all of the following:

(1) Abide by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1769 (2007).

(2) Cease attacks on civilians.

(3) Demobilize and demilitarize the Janjaweed and associated militias.

(4) Grant free and unfettered access for delivery of humanitarian assistance.

(5) Allow for the safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons.

(d) The Congress or President of the United States, through legislation or executive order, declares the contract prohibition of the type provided for in this act interferes with the conduct of United States foreign policy.

(e) Such other circumstances as the Legislature determines to warrant the discontinuance of the provisions of this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: This section suggests conditions for future action repealing Article 13, commencing with Section 10475.)
-------------------------------------------

10481.

(a) If any one or more provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is found to be invalid, illegal, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, the same is hereby declared to be severable and the balance of this act shall remain effective and functional notwithstanding such invalidity, illegality, unenforceability, or unconstitutionality.

(b) The Legislature hereby declares it would have passed this act, and each provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word be declared invalid, illegal, unenforceable, or unconstitutional.

(History: Added by Stats. 2008, Ch. 272, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2009.   Note: Section 10480 suggests conditions for future repeal action.)
-------------------------------------------

10490.

(a) A scrutinized company is ineligible to, and shall not, bid on or submit a proposal for a contract with a state agency for goods or services related to products or services that are the reason the company must comply with Section 13(p) of the federal Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

(b) For purposes of this section, a “scrutinized company” is a person that has been found to be in violation of Section 13(p) of the federal Securities Exchange Act of 1934 by final judgment or settlement entered in a civil or administrative action brought by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and the person has not remedied or cured the violation in a manner accepted by the commission on or before final judgment or settlement.

(c) A person shall cease to be regarded as a scrutinized company when the person is no longer deemed to be in violation of Section 13(p) of the federal Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or upon filing by such person of an amended or corrective filing under Section 13(p) of the federal Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which filing corrects the violations described in subdivision (b), or after three years from the date of final judgment or settlement, whichever is earlier.

(d) The Department of General Services shall establish in the State Administrative Manual or the State Contracting Manual policies and procedures for all state agencies, departments, boards, and commissions to implement the contract prohibition of this section.

(e) For purposes of this section, “goods or services” includes goods and services subject to
 this chapter (commencing with Section 10290), information technology goods and services subject to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), and telecommunication goods and services subject to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 12120).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 162, Sec. 141.   (SB 1171)   Effective January 1, 2013.   Stats. 2011, Ch. 715, Sec. 2, which added this section, becomes inoperative on the date prescribed by Sec. 3 of Ch. 715.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.1. University of California Competitive Bidding [10500. - 10527.]



  ARTICLE 1. Construction [10500. - 10506.]

10500.

As used in this article, “project” includes the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any University of California structure, building, road, or other improvement that will exceed in cost, including labor and materials, a total of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 563, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

10500.5.

It is the intent of the Legislature to facilitate the participation of small businesses, particularly small disadvantaged or minority business enterprises, women business enterprises, and disabled veteran business enterprises, in business contracting with the University of California. The Legislature intends that the Regents of the University of California adopt policies and procedures to ensure that a fair proportion of university contracts be placed with small business enterprises, particularly small disadvantaged, women, and disabled veteran business enterprises, in areas of commodity purchases, services, and construction contracts. It is further the intent of the Legislature that the regents adopt, by January 1, 1985, with respect to small business enterprises, particularly small disadvantaged and women business enterprises, and by January 1, 1992, with respect to disabled veteran business enterprises, policies and procedures that include, but are not limited to, all of the following:

(a) Annual targets for utilization of small businesses, particularly disadvantaged business enterprises, women business enterprises, and disabled veteran business enterprises, including subcontracts for construction.

(b) Annual statistical reports on the participation of small businesses, particularly disadvantaged business enterprises, women business enterprises, and disabled veteran business enterprises, as general contractors and subcontractors in each project.

(c) Outreach programs.

(d) Directories of disadvantaged business enterprises, women business enterprises, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

(e) Monitoring by the regents of progress with respect to the utilization of disadvantaged business enterprises, women business enterprises, and disabled veteran business enterprises.

It is also the intent of the Legislature that the Regents of the University of California report annually to the Legislature, on or before each July 1, on the participation of small disadvantaged business enterprises, women business enterprises, and disabled veteran business enterprises in university business contracting.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 516, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

10501.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Regents of the University of California shall let any contract for a project to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids. However, if one or more of the bids is substantially equal to the lowest bid, and at least one of those bidders is a disadvantaged business enterprise, a women business enterprise, or a disabled veteran business enterprise, the regents may award the contract in accordance with the policies and procedures adopted pursuant to Section 10500.5. If the regents deem it to be for the best interest of the university, the regents may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder for a project to execute a tendered contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder. If the second lowest bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the regents may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 516, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10502.

The Regents of the University of California shall give public notice of a project to bidders by publication twice within the 60-day period preceding the day set for the receiving of bids as follows:

(a) Either in one newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the major portion of the project is located and in one such trade paper circulated in the county in which the major portion of the work is to be done or electronically on the Internet Web site of the university.

(b) The notices shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids, describe in general terms the work to be done, and describe
 the bidding mode by which the lowest responsible bidder will be selected.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 687, Sec. 12.   (SB 876)   Effective September 27, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

10503.

Before entering into any contract for a project, the Regents of the University of California shall cause to be prepared estimates and either:

(a) Complete plans and specifications setting forth such directions as will enable a competent mechanic or other builder to carry them out.

(b) Documents for the solicitation of bids on a design-and-build basis, including: (1) a program setting forth the scope of the project, the size, type, and desired design character of the buildings and the site, (2) a set of performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, and workmanship, (3) a maximum acceptance cost, and (4) a method and grading system for evaluating contractor proposals on the basis of a preliminary design, outline specifications, a price, and the financial condition and relevant experience of the contractor and the contractor’s architect.

(c) Documents for the solicitation of bids for construction manager mode of contracting including prequalification standards, schematic plans, and outline specifications indicating the general scope of the project and the designation of those fees and other fixed commitments upon which prequalified contractors will be invited to submit competitive bids which will serve as the basis for selection.

(d) Documents for the solicitation of bids on a cost-plus fee mode of contracting, including prequalification standards, outline specifications, and schematic drawings generally describing the scope of the work, a definition of reimbursable and nonreimbursable costs, and the designation of fees and other fixed costs upon which prequalified contractors will be invited to submit quotations which will provide the basis for selection.

(e) Documents for the solicitation of bids under such other contracting mode as the regents determine to be in the best interest of the university, provided that such proposals be compared on a uniform basis and that award be made as determined by the published selection standards.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10504.

Except as otherwise provided in Section 10504.5 or 10506, work on all projects shall be performed under contract awarded in accordance with Section 10501, except that it may be done on a time and materials basis, by contract upon informal bids, by University of California employees, by day labor under the direction of the regents, or by a combination thereof, in case of emergency due to an act of God, earthquake, flood, storm, fire, landslide, public disturbance, vandalism, or failure that causes damage to a university-owned building or structure, university-owned real property, or any improvements thereon, when that work or those remedial measures are required immediately and are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 563, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

10504.5.

(a) Where the nature of the work, in the opinion of the Regents of the University of California, is such that the application of all of the provisions of this chapter in connection with that work is not required, and the cost of the project does not exceed six hundred forty thousand dollars ($640,000), the regents shall solicit bids in writing and shall award the work to the lowest responsible bidder or reject all bids.

(b) (1) The Regents of the University of California shall establish a procedure to qualify and rate a bidder for work to be awarded pursuant to subdivision (a) when the cost of the project exceeds three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) but
 does not exceed six hundred forty thousand dollars ($640,000).

(2) The procedures shall require a bidder to complete and submit a qualification questionnaire. The qualification questionnaire shall cover, at a minimum, the issues covered by the Model Pre-qualification Questionnaire developed in 1999 by the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 20101. The procedures shall also require a bidder to complete and submit a financial statement, unless the bidder is a contractor who has qualified as a Small Business Administration entity pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code. A bidder who is required to complete and submit a qualification questionnaire shall include the general contractor and, if utilized, the electrical, mechanical, and plumbing subcontractor, except that the nonqualification of a subcontractor shall not disqualify an otherwise qualified contractor.

(3) Each campus or facility shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating a bidder on the basis of the completed qualification questionnaire and, if available, financial statements to determine the minimum requirements permitted for qualification to submit a bid. Each campus or facility may process qualification questionnaires and financial statements on a quarterly basis to qualify a prospective bidder for a period of one calendar year from the date of qualification.

(4) Upon award to the lowest responsible bidder, each campus or facility shall publicly post on its Internet Web site a brief description of the project and the awarded amount along with the name of the contractor who is the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 364, Sec. 1.   (SB 502)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10505.

(a) The Regents of the University of California may perform projects with university employees if the regents deem that the award of a contract, the acceptance of bids, or the acceptance of further bids is not in the best interests of the university, under either of the following circumstances:

(1) The value of the project to be so performed shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).

(2) The project is for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of experimental, diagnostic, or specialized research equipment.

(b) This section does not apply to the painting or repainting of a structure, building, road, or improvement of any kind if the value of the painting or repainting project exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 563, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.

The requirements of Sections 10501, 10502, and 10503 shall not be applicable to (1) any project of which the Regents of the University of California is only part owner, or (2) any project funded by a federal agency to the extent that requirements of Sections 10501, 10502, and 10503 are in conflict with mandatory requirements of such federal agency, or (3) projects performed pursuant to Section 10505.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.5. Best Value Construction Contracting Program [10506.4. - 10506.10.]

10506.4.

(a) This article provides the Best Value Construction Contracting Program for the Regents of the University of California for projects over one million dollars ($1,000,000).

(b) The Regents of the University of California shall let any contract for a project pursuant to this article to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids.

(c) The lowest responsible bidder may be selected on the basis of the best value to the university, as defined in Section 10506.5. In order to implement this method of selection, the Regents of the University of California shall adopt and publish procedures and required guidelines
 for evaluating the qualifications of the bidders that ensure that best value selections by the university are conducted in a fair and impartial manner. These procedures and guidelines shall conform to the requirements of Sections 10506.6 and 10506.7 and shall be mandatory for the university when using best value selection.

(d) If one or more of the bids is substantially equal to the lowest bid, and at least one of those bidders is a disadvantaged business enterprise, a women business enterprise, or a disabled veteran business enterprise, the Regents of the University of California may award the contract in accordance with the policies and procedures adopted pursuant to Section 10500.5.

(e) If the Regents of the University of California deem it to be for the best interest of the
 university, the regents may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder for a project to execute a tendered contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder. If the second lowest responsible bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the regents may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 850, Sec. 2.   (AB 1424)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.5.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Best value” means a procurement process whereby the lowest responsible bidder may be selected on the basis of objective criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders with the resulting selection representing the best combination of price and qualifications.

(b) “Best value contract” means a contract entered into pursuant to the provisions of this article.

(c) “Best value contractor” means a properly licensed person, firm, or corporation that submits a bid for, or is awarded, a best value
 contract.

(d) “Demonstrated management competency” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity of the proposed management staffing to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity.

(e) “Financial condition” means the financial resources needed to perform the contract. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s financial condition shall include, at a minimum, capacity to obtain all required payment bonds, performance bonds, and liability insurance.

(f) “Labor compliance” means the ability to comply with, and past performance with, contract and statutory requirements for the payment of wages and qualifications of the workforce. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s labor compliance shall
 include, as a minimum, the bidder’s ability to comply with the apprenticeship requirements of the California Apprenticeship Council and the Department of Industrial Relations, its past conformance with such requirements, and its past conformance with requirements to pay prevailing wages on public works projects.

(g) “Project labor agreement” means a prehire collective bargaining agreement that establishes terms and conditions of employment for a specific construction project or projects and is an agreement described in Section 158(f) of Title 29 of the United States Code. 

(h) “Qualifications” means financial condition, relevant experience, demonstrated management competency, labor compliance, the safety record of the bidder, and, if required by the bidding documents, some
 or all of the preceding qualifications as they pertain to subcontractors proposed to be used by the bidder for designated portions of the work.

(i) “Relevant experience” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity.

(j) “Safety record” means the prior history concerning the safe performance of construction contracts. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s safety record shall include, as a minimum, its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period.

(k) “University” means all locations of the University of California.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 850, Sec. 3.   (AB 1424)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.6.

The university shall proceed in accordance with the following when awarding best value contracts under this article.

(a) The university shall prepare a solicitation for bids and give notice pursuant to Section 10502.

(b) The university shall establish a procedure to prequalify bidders. The information required pursuant to this section shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information submitted by the bidder as part of the evaluation process shall not be open to public inspection to the extent that information is exempt from disclosure under the California Public Records
 Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code).

(c) (1) A best value contractor shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the Regents of the University of California that the best value contractor and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Sections 10506.8 and 10506.9.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(A) The Regents of the University of California have entered into
 a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the Regents of the University of California prior to January 1, 2018.

(C) The best value contractor has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same
 meaning as in subdivision (g) of Section 10506.5.

(d) Each solicitation for bids shall do all of the following:

(1) Invite prequalified bidders to submit sealed bids in the manner prescribed by this article.

(2) Include a section identifying and describing the following:

(A) Criteria that the university will consider in evaluating the qualifications of the bidders.

(B) The methodology and rating or weighting system that will be used by the university in evaluating bids.

(C) The relative importance or weight assigned to the criteria for evaluating
 the qualifications of bidders identified in the request for bids.

(e) Final evaluation of the best value contractor shall be done in a manner that prevents cost or price information from being revealed to the committee evaluating the qualifications of the bidders prior to completion and announcement of that committee’s decision.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 358.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.7.

Selection of the best value contractor shall be made as follows:

(a) The university shall evaluate the qualifications of the bidders based solely upon the criteria set forth in the solicitation documents, and shall assign a qualifications score to each bid.

(b) The award of the contract shall be made to the bidder whose bid is determined, by the university in writing, to be the best value to the university. To determine the best value contractor, the university shall divide each bidder’s price by its qualifications score. The lowest resulting cost per quality point will represent the best value bid.

(c) The university shall issue a written decision of its contract award.

(d) Upon issuance of a contract award, the university shall publicly announce its award identifying the best value contractor to which the award is made, the project, the project price, and the selected best value contractor’s score based on the qualifications criteria for evaluating the bidders listed in the request for bids. The notice of award shall be made public and include the score of the selected best value contractor in relation to all other responsive bidders and their respective prices. The contract file shall include documentation sufficient to support the decision to award.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 636, Sec. 4.   (SB 835)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.8.

For purposes of this article:

(a) “Apprenticeable occupation” means an occupation for which the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards of the Department of Industrial Relations has approved an apprenticeship program pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code before January 1, 2014.

(b) “Chief” means the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards of the Department of Industrial Relations.

(c) “Graduate of an apprenticeship program” means either of the following:

(1) An individual
 who has been issued a certificate of completion under the authority of the California Apprenticeship Council for completing an apprenticeship program approved by the chief pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code.

(2) An individual who has completed an apprenticeship program located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(d) “Skilled and trained workforce” means a workforce that meets all of the following requirements:

(1) All of the workers performing work in an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades are either skilled journeypersons or apprentices registered in an apprenticeship
 program approved by the chief.

(2) (A) For work performed on or after January 1, 2017, at least 30 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work in the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation. This requirement shall not apply to work performed in the occupation of teamster.

(B) For work performed on or after January 1, 2018, at least 40
 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work in the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation. This requirement shall not apply to work performed in the following occupations: acoustical installer, bricklayer, carpenter, cement mason, drywall installer or lather, marble mason, finisher, or setter, modular furniture or systems installer, operating engineer, pile driver, plasterer, roofer or waterproofer, stone mason, surveyor, teamster, terrazzo worker or finisher, and tile layer, setter, or finisher. 

(C) For work performed on or after January 1, 2019, at least 50 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation. This requirement shall not apply to work performed in the following occupations: acoustical installer, bricklayer, carpenter, cement mason, drywall installer or lather, marble mason, finisher, or setter, modular furniture or systems installer, operating engineer, pile driver, plasterer, roofer or waterproofer, stone mason, surveyor, teamster, terrazzo worker or finisher, and tile layer,
 setter, or finisher.

(D) For work performed on or after January 1, 2020, at least 60 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by every contractor and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation. This requirement shall not apply to work performed in the following occupations: acoustical installer, bricklayer, carpenter, cement mason, drywall installer or lather, marble mason, finisher, or setter,
 modular furniture or systems installer, operating engineer, pile driver, plasterer, roofer or waterproofer, stone mason, surveyor, teamster, terrazzo worker or finisher, and tile layer, setter, or finisher.

(3) For an applicable occupation in which no apprenticeship program had been approved by the chief before January 1, 1995, up to one-half of the graduation percentage requirement of paragraph (2) may be satisfied by skilled journeypersons who commenced working in the apprenticeable occupation before the chief’s approval of an apprenticeship program for that occupation in the county in which the project is located.

(4) The apprenticeship graduation percentage requirements of paragraph (2) are satisfied if, in a calendar month, either of the following occurs:

(A) At least the required percentage of the skilled journeypersons employed by the contractor or subcontractor to perform work on the contract or project meet the graduation percentage requirements.

(B) For the hours of work performed by skilled journeypersons employed by the contractor or subcontractor on the contract or project, the percentage of hours performed by skilled journeypersons who meet the graduation requirement is at least equal to the required graduation percentage.

(5) The contractor or subcontractor need not meet the apprenticeship graduation requirements of paragraph (2) if, during the calendar month, the contractor or subcontractor employs skilled journeypersons to perform fewer than 10 hours
 of work on the contract or project.

(6) A subcontractor need not meet the apprenticeship requirements of paragraph (2) if both of the following requirements are met:

(A) The subcontractor was not a listed subcontractor under Section 4104 or a substitute for a listed subcontractor.

(B) The subcontract does not exceed one-half of 1 percent of the price of the prime contract.

(e) “Skilled journeyperson” means a worker who either:

(1) Graduated from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was approved by the chief or located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant
 to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(2) Has at least as many hours of on-the-job experience in the applicable occupation as would be required to graduate from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that is approved by the chief.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 850, Sec. 5.   (AB 1424)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.9.

(a) If a contractor, bidder, or other entity is required to provide an enforceable commitment that a skilled and trained workforce will be used to complete a contract or project, the commitment shall be made in an enforceable agreement with the university that provides both of the following:

(1) The contractor, bidder, or other entity, and its contractors and subcontractors at every tier, will comply with this article.

(2) The contractor, bidder, or other entity shall provide to the university, on a monthly basis while the project contract is being performed, a report demonstrating compliance with this article.

(b) If the contractor, bidder, or other entity fails to provide the monthly report required by this section, or provides a report that is incomplete, the university shall withhold further payments until a complete record is provided.

(c) If a monthly report does not demonstrate compliance with this article, the university shall withhold further payments until the contractor, bidder, or other entity provides a plan to achieve substantial compliance with this article, with respect to the relevant apprenticeable occupation, prior to completion of the contract or project.

(d) A monthly report provided to the university shall be a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section
 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) and shall be open to public inspection.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 359.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

10506.10.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article is not intended to change in any manner any guideline, criteria, procedure, or requirement of the Regents of the University of California to let any contract for a project to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 636, Sec. 7.   (SB 835)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Materials, Goods, and Services [10507.5. - 10510.]

10507.5.

It is the intent of the Legislature to encourage the procurement of recycled paper products by the University of California by developing guidelines to encourage the procurement of recycled paper products where suitable for the uses intended and where the quality is equal and the price is equal or less than nonrecycled paper products. It is also the intent of the Legislature that the regents report annually to the Legislature, the Governor, and the California Integrated Waste Management Board commencing January 1, 1991, on the percentage of the total dollar amount of recycled paper products purchased or procured under this article.

(History: Amended (as added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1094) by Stats. 1990, Ch. 586, Sec. 3.   Effective September 5, 1990.)
-------------------------------------------

10507.7.

Except as provided for in this article, the Regents of the University of California shall let all contracts involving an expenditure of more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) annually for goods and materials to be sold to the University of California to the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, or else reject all bids. Contracts for services to be performed, other than personal or professional services, involving an expenditure of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more annually shall be made or entered into with the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, or else all bids shall be rejected. If the regents deem it to be for the best interest of the university, the regents may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder
 for materials, goods, or services to execute a tendered contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications. If the second lowest responsible bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the regents may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 638, Sec. 1.   (SB 1122)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10507.8.

(a) As provided for in this article, when the University of California determines that it can expect long-term savings through the use of life-cycle cost methodology, the use of more sustainable goods and materials, and reduced administrative costs, the lowest responsible bidder may be selected on the basis of the best value to the university. In order to implement this method of selection, the Regents of the University of California shall adopt and publish policies and guidelines for evaluating bidders that ensure that best value selections by the university are conducted in a fair and impartial manner. These policies and guidelines shall conform to the requirements of subdivisions (c) and (d) and shall be applicable to the university when using best value as the bid evaluation methodology.

(b) For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Best value” means the most advantageous balance of price, quality, service, performance, and other elements, as defined by the university, achieved through methods in accordance with this section and determined by objective performance criteria that may include price, features, long-term functionality, life-cycle costs, overall sustainability, and required services.

(2) “Best value agreement” means an agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of this section.

(3) “Best value awardee” means the lowest responsible bidder or bidders that are awarded an agreement for goods, materials, or services that was awarded through the use of best value for the bid evaluation
 methodology.

(4) “Best value criteria” means those criteria set forth in subdivision (d).

(5) “University” means all current campuses and locations of the University of California, including the medical centers, the national laboratories, and any future University of California campuses and locations.

(c) (1) The university shall consider all of the following when adopting policies and guidelines pursuant to subdivision (a):

(A) Price and service proposals that reduce the university’s overall operating costs.

(B) Supply and material standards that support the university’s strategic sourcing initiatives.

(C) A procedure for bid protest and resolution.

(2) The university shall award a best value agreement as follows:

(A) The university shall evaluate bidders based solely upon the best value criteria set forth in the solicitation documents. Solicitation for bids shall describe the best value criteria that the university will consider in evaluating the bidders by overall category and by specific attributes.

(B) The university shall award the agreement to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders whose bid or bids are determined by the university to be the best value in terms of price, quality, service, and performance, and that meet the university’s requirements.

(C) Bid participants that are not awarded a best value agreement shall be notified
 in writing at the end of the agreement award process.

(d) For the purposes of this section, the university may take into consideration any of the following best value criteria when awarding a best value agreement for goods, materials, and services:

(1) The total cost to the university of its use or consumption of goods, materials, and services.

(2) The operational cost or benefit incurred by the university as a result of a contract award.

(3) The added value to the university, as defined in the request for proposal, of vendor-added services.

(4) The quality and effectiveness of goods, materials, and services.

(5) The use of
 more sustainable goods and materials in the manufacturing of the goods and materials and the packaging of these products.

(6) The reliability and timeliness of delivery and installation.

(7) The terms and conditions of product warranties, maintenance, and vendor guarantees.

(8) The vendor’s quality assurance, continuous improvement, and business resumption programs and their benefit to the university.

(9) The vendor’s experience with the timely provision of goods, materials, and services.

(10) The consistency of quality and availability of the vendor’s proposed supplies, materials, and services with the university’s overall procurement program.

(11) The economic benefits to the local community, including, but not limited to, job creation or retention and the support of small and local businesses.

(e) The university shall ensure that all businesses have a fair and equitable opportunity to compete for, and participate in, the university best value bids and shall also ensure that discrimination in the award and performance of the agreement does not occur on the basis of gender, marital status, ancestry, medical condition, or any characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code, or retaliation for having filed a discrimination complaint or protest in the performance of university contractual obligations.

(f) This section applies solely to the procurement of goods, materials, or services and shall not apply to construction contracts.

(g) Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article is not intended to change in any manner any guideline, criteria, procedure, or requirement of the Regents of the University of
 California to let any contract for goods, materials, or services to the lowest responsible bidder meeting certain specifications or to reject all bids.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 725, Sec. 1.   (AB 3186)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

10508.

The requirements of this article shall not be applicable when the regents determine that a brand or trade name article, thing, or product or proprietary service is the only one which will properly meet the needs of the University of California because the item or service is unique, available only from a sole source, or is designated to match others, used in, or furnished to, a particular installation, facility, or location. Contracts for unique products or services, or personal or professional services, shall not be made unless the regents determine that the proposed price therefor is reasonable.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10508.5.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, including, but not limited to, the advertising, bidding, and protest provisions of Chapter 2.1 (commencing with Section 10500), the University of California may award a contract for the acquisition of goods, services, or information technology that has an estimated value of greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), but less than two hundred fifty
 thousand dollars ($250,000), to a certified small business, including a microbusiness, or to a disabled veteran business enterprise, if the University of California obtains price
 quotations from two or more certified small businesses, including microbusinesses, or from two or more disabled veteran business enterprises.

(b) In carrying out subdivision (a), the University of California shall consider a responsive offer timely received from a responsible certified small business, including a microbusiness, or from a disabled veteran business enterprise.

(c) No provision of this section shall apply to the University of California except to the extent that the Regents of the University of California, by appropriate resolution, make that provision applicable.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 262, Sec. 2.   (AB 173)   Effective January 1, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

10509.

The Regents of the University of California shall prescribe methods of procurement for goods, materials, and services to be purchased, including:

(a) Requirements for public advertisement where feasible and practicable or for solicitation from at least three sources in other cases.

(b) Bidder prequalification and evaluation standards.

(c) Guidelines for negotiating contracts for unique products or proprietary services.

(d) Procedures for solicitation of vendor and service contractor interest.

(e) Dissemination of award information.

(f) Such other matters as may encourage the receipt of the most favorable price and conditions of purchase by the university.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

10509.5.

Notwithstanding any other law, commencing January 1, 2024, the University of California shall not approve a health benefit plan contract for employees that does not comply with the contraceptive coverage requirements of Sections 1367.25 and 1367.255 of the Health and Safety Code Sections 10123.1945 and 10123.196 of the Insurance Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 630, Sec. 19.   (SB 523)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.

The requirements of this article shall not be applicable to the procurement of goods, materials, or services funded exclusively by federal agencies to the extent that the requirements of this article are in conflict with mandatory requirements of such federal agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2.5. Contracts with Private Architects, Engineering, Environmental, Land Surveying, and Construction Project Management Firms [10510.4. - 10510.9.]

10510.4.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Firm” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity permitted by law to practice the profession of architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, environmental services, land surveying, or construction project management.

(b) “Architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, and land surveying services” include those professional services of an architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, or land surveying nature as well as incidental services that members of these professions and their employees may logically or justifiably perform.

(c) “Construction project management” means those services provided by a licensed architect, registered engineer, or licensed general contractor that meet the requirements of Section 10510.9 for management and supervision of work performed on university construction projects.

(d) “Environmental services” means those services performed in connection with project development and permit processing in order to comply with federal and state environmental laws. “Environmental services” also includes the processing and awarding of claims pursuant to Chapter 6.75 (commencing with Section 25299.10) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code.

(e) “Real property development services” means those services undertaken by a real estate developer in connection with the development of a developer-owned project on land owned or controlled by the university, including, but not limited to, environmental analysis, landscape planning, site design, market and financial feasibility, and other incidental services that a real estate developer may perform for the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.5.

(a) Selection by the University of California for professional services of private architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, real property development services, or construction project management firms shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required. In order to implement this method of selection, the university shall adopt procedures that assure that these services are engaged on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualifications for the types of services to be performed and at fair and reasonable prices to the university. Furthermore, these procedures shall assure maximum participation of small business firms, as defined by the Director of General Services pursuant to Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(b) These procedures shall specifically prohibit practices that might result in unlawful activity including, but not limited to, rebates, kickbacks, or other unlawful consideration, and shall specifically prohibit university employees from participating in the selection process when those employees have a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract under this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.6.

(a) The University of California shall follow this section in negotiating fees and executing a contract for professional consulting services of a private architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, land surveying, environmental, real property development services, or construction project management firm.

(b) After providing notification to the successful firm of its selection, the university shall provide written instructions for the negotiations that are to follow. These instructions shall provide the private consulting firm with necessary information that shall allow the negotiations to proceed in an orderly fashion. Negotiations shall begin within 14 days after the successful firm has been notified of its selection or upon receipt of the cost proposal. The contractor should be notified if additional time is necessary to begin negotiations.

(c) Upon the completion of negotiations, the university and the private firm shall proceed to execute a contract that the university shall complete within 45 days. The contractor should be notified if additional time is necessary to complete the contract. The university and private firm shall work together to ensure the successful delivery of the requested services in a timely fashion.

(d) In the event an impasse is reached in negotiations, the university may terminate negotiations and enter into negotiations with the next qualified firm, in the same manner as prescribed in Section 10510.8 with respect to management services contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.7.

(a) In the procurement of architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, real property development services, and construction project management services, the university shall encourage firms engaged in the lawful practice of their profession to submit annually a statement of qualifications and performance data.

(b) (1) Statewide announcement of all projects requiring architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, real property development services, or construction project management services shall be made by the university through advertisements placed in the California State Contracts Register and in publications of the respective professional societies and organizations of persons that perform those services. Alternatively, the university may develop policies to provide for electronic statewide notice of the required announcements to ensure notification through, at a minimum, appropriate professional societies and organizations and the California State Contracts Register, to those persons that perform the services sought to be procured.

(2) The university, for each proposed project, shall evaluate current statements of qualifications and performance data on file with the university, together with those that may be submitted by other firms regarding the proposed project.

(3) (A) The university, for each proposed project, shall conduct discussions with no less than three firms regarding anticipated concepts and the relative utility of alternative methods of approach for furnishing the required services.

(B) The university shall select, from the firms with which it conducted discussions in order of preference, based upon criteria established and published by the university, no less than three of the firms deemed to be the most highly qualified to provide the services required.

(C) If a project announcement results in submissions from fewer than three qualified firms, the university may then select from the available qualified firms and shall document its efforts to receive submissions from additional firms.

(D) These procedures shall specifically prohibit practices that might result in unlawful activity including, but not limited to, rebates, kickbacks, or other unlawful consideration, and shall specifically prohibit university employees from participating in the selection process when those employees have a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract under this section.

(4) This subdivision does not apply to a contract for the services described in Section 10510.4 with a total contract cost of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or less, provided that the type of project for which the contract is awarded is identified by the university in an annual announcement, made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (1), that identifies the project needs of the university that are projected to have a total contract price of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or less.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.8.

(a) The university shall negotiate a contract with the best qualified firm for architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, land surveying, real property development services, and construction project management services at compensation that the university determines is fair and reasonable to the University of California.

(b) Should the university be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified, at a price the university determines to be fair and reasonable to the University of California, negotiations with that firm shall be formally terminated. The university shall then undertake negotiations with the second most qualified firm. Failing accord with the second most qualified firm, the university shall terminate negotiations. The university shall then undertake negotiations with the third most qualified firm.

(c) Should the university be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with any of the selected firms, the university shall select additional firms in order of their competence and qualification and continue negotiations in accordance with this article until an agreement is reached.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.9.

Any individual or firm proposing to provide construction project management services pursuant to this article shall provide evidence that the individual or firm and its personnel carrying out onsite responsibilities have expertise and experience in construction project design review and evaluation, construction mobilization and supervision, bid evaluation, project scheduling, cost-benefit analysis, claims review and negotiation, and general management and administration of a construction project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2.7. University of California Vendors [10510.50. - 10510.54.]

10510.50.

This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the Recovery of Earned but Unpaid Wages Act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 480, Sec. 1.   (SB 27)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.51.

As used in this article:

(a) “Aggrieved employee” means either of the following:

(1) An employee against whom one or more alleged violations of this article was committed.

(2) A university employee coworker of an employee against whom one or more alleged violations of this article was committed who performs services for the university at or for the same university location or department as the employee.

(b) “Basic payroll information” means, for each vendor-supplied employee who performed services at any
 time during the preceding six-month period, the following information:

(1) The employee’s full name, job title, mobile telephone number, email address, and home address.

(2) Work location while performing services for the university.

(3) The employee’s hourly rate of pay while performing services for the university for each applicable pay period during the preceding six-month period.

(4) The hourly value of employer-provided benefits, if any, received by the employee while performing services for the university for each applicable pay period during the preceding six-month period.

(5) The
 employee’s hours of work while performing services for the university for each applicable pay period during the six-month period.

(c) “Contract” includes any written instrument, purchase order, change order, order, requisition, service agreement, or other written or electronic document, however titled, reflecting an agreement that the vendor will perform services or supply the university with employees to perform services in exchange for payment.

(d) “Employee” includes any contract worker, or individual employed by any vendor, or otherwise supplied to the university by any vendor, to perform services for the university. “Employee” also includes an individual treated by either the vendor, a subcontractor, or the university as an independent contractor. “Employee” does not
 include any individual who is a parent, spouse, child, or legally adopted child of the employer, any sole proprietor, or any individual with an ownership interest of 5 percent or more in the vendor.

(e) “Employer” means any person, as defined in Section 18 of the Labor Code, who directly or indirectly, or through an agent or any other person, employs or exercises control over the wages, hours, or working conditions of any person.

(f) “Hourly value of employer-provided benefits” means the employer’s actual cost for the employee’s benefits, including, but not limited to, retirement, health, dental, vision,
 and life and disability benefits calculated as an hourly dollar amount. It does not include any paid time off or any payroll expenses required by law. For any employee who does not receive employer-provided benefits, the following shall apply:

(1) For health, dental, or vision benefits, the value of those benefits is the value of the health, dental, or vision benefits offered to an
 employee if all of the following are true:

(A) The employee is not a Medi-Cal beneficiary.

(B) The employee is offered but does not elect to receive employer-provided health, dental, or vision benefits.

(C) The employee would receive benefits equivalent to benefits provided to university employees performing the same work.

(2) For health, dental, or vision benefits, if the requirements of paragraph (1) are not met, the hourly value is zero dollars ($0).

(3) For all other employer-provided benefits, if an employee does not receive the benefit, for whatever reason, the hourly value is zero dollars ($0).

(g) “Joint labor-management committee” includes any joint labor-management committee or similar meeting body or committee established jointly by the university and the exclusive
 representative of university employees who perform the same or similar services as the employees performing services for the university.

(h) “Services” means work that is subject to university policy. “Services” includes services that have been customarily performed by bargaining unit employees of the university, including, but not limited to, the following services: cleaning, custodial, janitorial, or housekeeping services; food services; laundry services; grounds keeping; nonskilled crafts building maintenance; transportation and parking services; security services; billing and coding services; sterile processing; hospital and nursing assistant services; respiratory therapy; and medical imaging services. “Services” does not include financial investment or retirement planning advice, retirement plan recordkeeping, or asset
 management.

(i) “Subcontractor” means any person, employer, supplier of labor, staffing agency, temporary services employer, or other entity that performs services for the university or supplies employees to perform services, pursuant to a contract with a vendor.

(j) “Total compensation rate” means the employee’s hourly rate of pay plus the hourly value of employer-provided benefits, or the equivalent compensation.

(k) “University” means the University of California.

(l) “University policy” means a policy or collective bargaining agreement adopted or approved by the university that requires vendors to provide employees wages and benefits of equivalent value
 to the wages and benefits provided to university employees performing the same work.

(m) “Vendor” means contractor and includes any person,
 employer, supplier of labor, staffing agency, temporary services employer, labor broker, management services provider, or other entity that contracts with the university to provide services or to supply the university with its own employees or those of a subcontractor to perform services. “Vendor” also means any person acting either individually or as an officer, agent, or employee of a vendor. “Vendor” does not include a contractor in the construction industry. For purposes of this subdivision, “contractor in the construction industry” means an employer that provides work associated with construction, including work involving alteration, demolition, building, excavation, renovation, remodeling, maintenance, improvement, repair work, and any other work as described by Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, and other similar
 or related occupations or trades.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 480, Sec. 1.   (SB 27)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.52.

(a) A vendor that supplies the university with employees to perform services, shall provide those employees with written notice of the total compensation rate specified in the vendor’s contract with the university or required by university policy, whichever is higher, and the employee’s hourly rate of pay and hourly value of employer-provided benefits. The vendor shall provide employees with these notices at the time each employee is assigned to perform services for the university and thereafter, each January, and within seven days of a change to the employee’s hourly rate.

(b) (1) In January and July of each year, the vendor shall provide
 basic payroll information to the university and members of any joint labor-management committee. The vendor shall provide all employees who agree to perform services for the university or continue doing so with written notice of this requirement and the written notice shall also include the following text:
“Basic payroll information pertaining to all employees who accept an assignment or continue performing services for the University of California will be shared with the University of California and the organizations that represent University of California employees. The information that will be shared includes your full name, university work location, mobile telephone number, email address, and home address. The purpose of sharing this information is to ensure that the University of California and the organizations
 that represent University of California employees can contact you if they discover you have been paid less than required by the vendor’s contract with the university or university policy and so that the University of California can provide you with a timely offer of employment as soon as you become eligible.”
(2) Basic payroll information for an individual employee who performs services for the university shall also, upon request, be made available for inspection by that individual employee or that individual employee’s authorized representative or be furnished to that individual employee or that individual employee’s authorized representative.

(c) If an auditor, vendor, the university, or any other person conducts or receives an audit,
 verification, notice, report, or finding with regard to whether a vendor has compensated employees at the total compensation rate required by the vendor’s contract with the university or university policy, including the vendor’s failure to provide employees with any “wage and benefits parity” rate required by university policy, that audit, verification, notice, report, or finding shall be provided to the university and members of any joint labor-management committee.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 480, Sec. 1.   (SB 27)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.53.

(a) It shall be unlawful for any vendor to accept payment from the university pursuant to a contract for services if the vendor is performing services or supplying the university with employees to perform services who are paid less than the total compensation rate specified in the vendor’s contract with the university or required by university policy, whichever is higher.

(b) An aggrieved employee may bring a civil action, including on behalf of an employee or employees against whom a violation of this article was committed, against a vendor to recover compensation that has been earned but was not paid at the total compensation rate required by the vendor’s contract
 with the university or university policy, whichever is higher, or to enforce any other provision of this article.

(c) (1) Prior to bringing an action against a vendor, an aggrieved employee shall first provide a vendor with written notice of an alleged violation of this article. The notice shall include the names or other information sufficient to identify the employees against whom the alleged violations were committed, dates of employment, the period of alleged noncompliance, and contact information. The notice shall also provide the vendor with the opportunity to correct and cure the violation.

(2) If a vendor receives written notice pursuant to paragraph (1), the vendor shall provide a copy of the written notice to the president of the university within
 five business days of receipt.

(3) Upon providing written notice pursuant to paragraph (1), an aggrieved employee may file suit only if the vendor fails to provide documentation, within 60 days, demonstrating that each employee identified in the notice has been made whole, has been provided with the notices required by this article, and is receiving a total compensation rate no less than the rate specified in the vendor’s contract with the university or in university policy, whichever is higher.

(d) If a claimant prevails in an action brought under this section, the vendor shall notify the president of the university of the decision and the court shall order the following:

(1) Any vendor that supplies the university
 with any employee who is paid a total compensation rate less than the amount fixed by the vendor’s contract with the university or university policy to pay a penalty and restitution, as follows:

(A) For any initial violation of subdivision (a), one hundred dollars ($100) for each underpaid employee for each pay period for which the employee is underpaid, not exceeding an aggregate penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) per employee. This amount shall be in addition to an amount sufficient to recover underpaid compensation.

(B) For each subsequent violation of subdivision (a), two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each underpaid employee for each pay period for which the employee is underpaid, not exceeding an aggregate penalty of one thousand dollars ($1000) per employee. This
 amount shall be in addition to an amount sufficient to recover underpaid compensation.

(C) For each knowing and intentional failure by a vendor to comply with Section 10510.52, fifty dollars ($50) per employee for the initial pay period in which a violation occurs and one hundred dollars ($100) per employee for each violation in a subsequent pay period, not exceeding an aggregate penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per employee. This amount shall be in addition to an amount sufficient to recover underpaid compensation.

(2) To the extent a vendor bills the university for services provided via an hourly bill rate, and to the extent a vendor fails to pay its employees the amount fixed by the vendor’s contract with the university or university policy, a court may, in its discretion,
 require that the vendor return to the university any amounts paid by the university to the vendor for services that exceed the amounts the vendor paid to its employees providing services for any payroll periods after January 1, 2024.

(3) Reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.

(e) Compensation and penalties recovered pursuant to this section shall be paid to the employee against whom a violation of this article was committed.

(f) The remedies provided for in this section are in addition to any other remedies provided by law. The penalties provided for in this section are in addition to any other penalties provided by law except that an employee shall not also receive penalties provided for in subdivision (f) of Section 226
 or Section 1197.1 of the Labor Code.

(g) This section shall not preclude or alter the university’s ability to contract for services as permitted under existing policies or collective bargaining agreements, nor shall it preclude the university from hiring in emergency circumstances or to meet other staffing needs.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 480, Sec. 1.   (SB 27)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

10510.54.

The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 480, Sec. 1.   (SB 27)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Real Property [10511. - 10513.]

10511.

(a) (1) The Regents of the University of California shall give public notice to bidders of the sale of University of California real property situated in California if the estimated value of the real property to be sold exceeds the amount specified in paragraph (2).

(2) Paragraph (1) shall apply to real property whose estimated value exceeds one million dollars ($1,000,000) net to the seller.

(b) Notice of
 the sale of real property shall be by publication a minimum of six times, between 2 and 12 weeks preceding the day set for receiving bids, as follows:

(1) A minimum of three times in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the property is situated.

(2) At least three times in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Los Angeles, the City of San Diego, the City of San Francisco, or the City of Sacramento, whichever is deemed most appropriate by the regents.

(3) The published notices shall specify the general description of the property, the source for bid materials and information, and the date and place for the receiving of sealed bids.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 361, Sec. 1.   (AB 2726)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10512.

(a) On the date designated in the public notice, the sealed bids shall be publicly opened.

(b) (1) The regents shall accept in public the bid or proposal that it deems to offer the best combination of price, terms, and bidder’s qualifications to the university, or reject all bids or proposals.
 A bidder’s qualifications may include factors other than price and terms, such as the bidder’s ability to complete the transaction or to secure development entitlements.

(2) If a successful bidder fails to perform in the manner specified, the regents may, at their sole option and without further notice, accept, from those remaining bids or proposals submitted and opened in public pursuant to subdivision (a), the bid
 or proposal that it deems to offer the best combination of price, terms, and bidder’s qualifications to the university.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 361, Sec. 2.   (AB 2726)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

10513.

The publication and award procedures set forth in this article shall not be applicable to any of the following:

(a) The sale of an undivided or fractional ownership interest in real property.

(b) A sale of a right of use in real property that is less than fee ownership.

(c) A sale of real property subject to title conditions or restrictions on the university’s ownership deriving from the origin of that ownership by gift, devise, or otherwise, if that sale would be inconsistent with those title conditions or restrictions.

(d) The disposition of real property acquired through exercise of a power of
 sale pursuant to a deed of trust, foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure, transactions when property is accepted in settlement of a defaulted mortgage, legal settlement, or held as an asset in the university’s investment portfolio.

(e) A sale of public lands under the direction of the federal land agent.

(f) A sale to a person or entity who will dedicate the real property to public use.

(g) A sale of real property acquired after January 1, 1985, through eminent domain proceedings initiated by the Regents of the University of California. In those cases, the person from whom the property was acquired shall be notified and be accorded an exclusive opportunity for 90 days to purchase the property at its fair market value. If the person fails to undertake proceedings to purchase the property within 90 days, the
 procedures specified in Sections 10511 and 10512 shall then be followed in the sale of the property.

(h) An exchange to acquire real property of another person or entity for university purposes. Any exchange shall be upon terms and conditions agreed to by the exchanging parties.

(i) The transfer of the Rochdale Apartments located at 2424 Haste Street, in the City of Berkeley, County of Alameda, Assessor Parcel Number 55-1881-17-1, from the Regents of the University of California to the Berkeley Student Cooperative for the purpose of maintaining affordable housing. The Regents of the University of California shall reserve a right of reverter, which may be subordinated at the discretion of the regents and would be subject to existing liens and obligations of the property, in the event the property ceases to be used for affordable housing by the Berkeley Student Cooperative and its
 successors or assigns.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 764, Sec. 1.   (SB 56)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Conflict of Interest [10515. - 10518.]

10515.

(a) No person, firm, or subsidiary thereof who has been awarded a consulting services contract may submit a bid for, nor be awarded a contract on or after July 1, 2003, for the provision of services, procurement of goods or supplies, or any other related action that is required, suggested, or otherwise deemed appropriate in the end product of the consulting services contract.

(b) Subdivision (a) does not apply to either of the following:

(1) Any person, firm, or subsidiary thereof who is awarded a subcontract of a consulting services contract that amounts to no more than 10 percent of the total monetary value of the consulting services contract.

(2) Consulting services contracts that comply with Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 10510.4).

(c) (1) Subdivision (a) does not apply to any person, firm, or subsidiary awarded a consulting services contract by a University of California medical center when the provision of service, procurement of goods or supplies, or any other related action required, suggested, or otherwise deemed appropriate in the end product of the consulting services contract, is necessary to avoid a competitive disadvantage in the hospital industry, improve patient care, protect the privacy of patient information, or avoid significant delay and additional expense.

(2) The University of California shall report within 30 days on any exemption granted under paragraph (1) to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee and the Department of Finance. The report shall include a description of the circumstances that warranted the exemption, the effects of the exemption on patient care or patient privacy, and a calculation of the projected costs savings to the institution as a result of the exemption.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10516.

No officer or employee of the University of California shall engage in any employment, activity, or enterprise from which the officer or employee receives compensation or in which the officer or employee has a financial interest if that employment, activity, or enterprise is sponsored or funded, or sponsored and funded, by any university department through or by a university contract unless the employment, activity, or enterprise is within the course and scope of the officer’s or employee’s regular university employment. No officer or employee in the university shall contract on his or her own individual behalf as an independent contractor with any university department to provide services or goods. This section shall not apply to officers or employees of the
 university with teaching or research responsibilities, nor shall it apply to student employees for payment for additional campus activities or engagements outside of the scope of their primary university employment.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 638, Sec. 2.   (SB 1122)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

10517.

(a) No retired, dismissed, separated, or formerly employed person of the University of California employed with the university or otherwise appointed to serve in the university may enter into a contract in which he or she engaged in any of the negotiations, transactions, planning, arrangements, or any part of the decisionmaking process relevant to the contract while employed in any capacity by any university department. The prohibition of this subdivision shall apply to a person only during the two-year period beginning on the date the person left university employment.

(b) For a period of 12 months following the date of his or her retirement, dismissal, or separation from the University of California, no person employed in the university or otherwise appointed to serve in the university may enter into a contract with any university department, if he or she was employed by that department in a policymaking position in the same general subject area as the proposed contract within the 12-month period prior to his or her retirement, dismissal, or separation. The prohibition of this subdivision shall not apply to a contract requiring the person’s services as an expert witness in a civil case or to a contract for the continuation of an attorney’s services on a matter he or she was involved with prior to leaving the university.

(c) This section does not prohibit the rehire or reappointment of University of California employees after retirement, consistent with university administrative policies, nor does it apply to inventors and authors of intellectual property licensed under technology transfer agreements.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1122, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.   Operative July 1, 2003, by Sec. 5 of Ch. 1122.)
-------------------------------------------

10518.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), each contractor who enters into a contract with a University of California campus for ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more shall be assigned an identification number by the chancellor of that university campus. Each contractor who has been assigned a number shall list it on each contract the contractor enters into with the university campus, regardless of the amount of the contract. In the case of a corporation or firm, the chancellor’s assigned number shall be used exclusively on each contract with that particular chancellor’s campus. The assigned number shall remain unchanged regardless of future name changes.

(b) If the identification numbers cannot be tracked centrally by the Regents of the University of California, then the regents, and not the chancellors, shall assign the identification numbers.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 5. Remedies and Penalties [10520. - 10527.]

10520.

Every contract or other transaction entered in violation of any provision of this chapter is void, unless the violation is technical or nonsubstantive.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1122, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.   Operative July 1, 2003, by Sec. 5 of Ch. 1122.)
-------------------------------------------

10521.

The University of California, or any person acting on behalf of the university, may bring a civil action seeking a determination by the superior court that a contract or other transaction has been entered in violation of any provision of this chapter. If the court finds substantial evidence of a violation, it may issue a temporary injunction to prevent any further dealings upon the contract or other transaction, pending a final determination on the merits of the case. If the action results in a final determination that the contract or other transaction has been entered in violation of this chapter, it shall be void, and the state or person bringing the action shall be awarded costs and attorney’s fees. This section shall not be construed to permit an award of costs and attorney fees to the person or entity contracting or otherwise transacting with the university.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1122, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.   Operative July 1, 2003, by Sec. 5 of Ch. 1122.)
-------------------------------------------

10522.

Any officer or employee of the University of California who corruptly performs any official act under this chapter to the injury of the university is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1122, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.   Operative July 1, 2003, by Sec. 5 of Ch. 1122.)
-------------------------------------------

10523.

Any person contracting with the University of California by oral or written contract who corruptly permits the violation of any contract made under this chapter is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1122, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.   Operative July 1, 2003, by Sec. 5 of Ch. 1122.)
-------------------------------------------

10524.

Persons convicted under Section 10522 or 10523 are also liable to the University of California for double the amount the university may have lost or be liable to lose by reason of the acts made crimes by this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 62, Sec. 242.5.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10525.

Willful violation of any other provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 1122, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.   Operative July 1, 2003, by Sec. 5 of Ch. 1122.)
-------------------------------------------

10526.

Sections 10522, 10523, 10524, and 10525 of this article do not apply to violations of Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 10510.4) of this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10527.

This article does not apply to violations of Article 2.7 (commencing with Section 10510.50) of this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 480, Sec. 2.   (SB 27)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.5. California State University Contract Law [10700. - 11005.]



  ARTICLE 1. General Provisions [10700. - 10710.]

10700.

This chapter may be cited as the California State University Contract Law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10701.

As used in this chapter:

(a) “Project” includes the erection, construction, alteration, painting, repair, or improvement of any state structure, building, road, or other state improvement of any kind. “Project” includes a project located on California State University property and performed pursuant to a contract entered into or awarded by an auxiliary organization, as defined in Section 89901 of the Education Code, and funded in whole or in part by public funds.

(b) “Service contract” means any contract for services in connection with a project other than a project contract, and includes, but is not limited to, contracts for architectural, engineering, planning, testing, general studies, or feasibility services.

(c) “Trustees” means the Trustees of the California State University and their designees.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 346, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

10702.

Contracts for the purchase of supplies or materials, which are purchased through the Department of General Services, are not subject to this chapter, even though the seller is required to perform some incidental work or service in connection with the delivery of the material or supplies.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10703.

Work done directly by any public utility company pursuant to order of the Public Utilities Commission or other public authority, is not subject to this chapter, whether or not done under public supervision or paid for in whole or part out of public funds.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10704.

The project shall be under the sole and direct control of the trustees, pursuant to the powers and responsibilities invested in them by Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 66600) of Part 40 of Division 5 of Title 3 of the Education Code. For the purposes of this chapter, a project located on California State University property and performed pursuant to a contract entered into or awarded by an auxiliary organization, as defined in Section 89901 of the Education Code, and funded in whole or in part by public funds, shall be deemed to be under the sole and direct control of the trustees.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 346, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

10705.

(a) When, in the opinion of the trustees, the work does not require the application of all of the provisions of this chapter in connection therewith, the trustees may carry out the project pursuant to this section if the estimated cost does not exceed the value of a minor capital outlay project for which, pursuant to Section 10108, the services of the Department of General Services are not required and a state agency or department is authorized to carry out its own project.

(b) If the estimated total cost of any construction project or work carried out under this section exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), the trustees shall solicit bids in writing and shall award the work to the lowest responsible bidder or reject all bids. The trustees may carry out work in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) under this section by day labor if the trustees deem that the award of a contract, the acceptance of bids, or the acceptance of further bids is not in the best interests of the state, but the amount of work performed by day labor under this section shall not exceed the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2001, Ch. 219, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------

10706.

The trustees and the Department of General Services may enter into an agreement under which the Department of General Services will carry out any of the functions of the trustees under this chapter, upon such terms as are mutually agreed upon.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10706.5.

The trustees may enter into an agreement with an auxiliary organization, as defined in Section 89901 of the Education Code, under which the auxiliary organization may carry out any of the functions of the trustees under this chapter, upon terms that are mutually agreed upon.

(History: Added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 346, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

10707.

The trustees may enter into service contracts. Such contracts shall be subject only to Section 10820 and to such other provisions of this chapter, if any, as the trustees may from time to time designate as applicable.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10708.

(a) When, in the opinion of the trustees, the best interests of the California State University dictate, the trustees may enter into an agreement with a contractor to provide all or significant portions of the design services and construction of a project under this chapter. The contractor shall design the project pursuant to the scope of services set forth in the request for proposals, build the project, and present the completed project to the trustees for their approval and acceptance.

(b) Work under this section shall be carried out by a contractor chosen by a competitive bidding process that employs selection criteria in addition to cost. Any design work performed pursuant to this section shall be prepared and signed by an architect certificated pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 5500) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code.

(c) When the design of portions of the project permits the selection of subcontractors, the contractor shall competitively bid those portions. The contractor shall provide to the trustees a list of subcontractors whose work is in excess of one-half of 1 percent of the total project cost as soon as the subcontractors are identified. Once listed, the subcontractors shall have the rights provided in the Subletting and Subcontracting Fair Practices Act (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 318, Sec. 13.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

10709.

Notwithstanding any provision of the California State University Contract Law and any other provision of law to the contrary, the trustees may enter into an energy conservation construction contract, on the terms it determines are in the best interests of the California State University if they find that the anticipated cost for the alterations effected by the energy conservation construction contract will be less than the anticipated marginal cost to the California State University of energy that would have been consumed by the California State University in the absence of those alterations. The letting of contracts pursuant to this section shall be conducted through competitive means.

(History: Added by Stats. 1995, Ch. 522, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

10710.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the trustees may award annual contracts that do not exceed three million dollars ($3,000,000) for repair or other repetitive work, or renovation or modification, to be done according to unit prices. The contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, and shall be based primarily on plans and specifications for typical work. No project shall be performed under a contract of this type except by order of the trustees. No annual contracts may be awarded under these provisions for capital outlay projects, where the total cost of the project exceeds the value of a minor capital outlay project for which, pursuant to Section 10108, the services of the Department of General Services are not required and a state agency or department is authorized to carry out its own project.

(b) For purposes of this section, “unit price” means the amount paid for a single unit of an item of work, and “typical work” means a work description applicable universally or applicable to a large number of individual projects, as distinguished from work specifically described with respect to an individual project.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2001, Ch. 219, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Plans and Specifications [10720. - 10726.]

10720.

Before entering into any contract for a project, the trustees, pursuant to the powers invested in them by Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 66600) of Part 40 of Division 5 of Title 3 of the Education Code, shall cause to be prepared full, complete, and accurate plans and specifications and estimates of cost, giving such directions as will enable any competent mechanic or other builder to carry them out.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10721.

The plans, specifications, and estimates of cost shall be approved by the trustees, and the original draft or a certified copy filed permanently in the office of the trustees before further action is taken.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10722.

Work on all projects shall be done under contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to this chapter, except that it may be done by day’s labor under the direction of the trustees, by contract upon informal bids, or by a combination thereof:

(a) When the trustees determine that an emergency exists due to an act of God, earthquake, flood, storm, fire, landslide, public disturbance, vandalism, or other unexpected cause which results in damage to a state-owned building, state-owned real property, or any improvements thereon, for work and remedial measures which are required immediately and which are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

The trustees shall annually, on or before December 31, report to the Department of Finance and the Joint Legislative Budget Committee the instances in which an exemption from the bidding process was allowed due to “unexpected causes.” 

(b) At any time after the approval of plans, specifications, and estimates of cost, if the trustees deem the advertising or award of a contract, the acceptance of any bid, or the acceptance of any further bids after the rejection of all submitted bids, is not in the best interests of the state.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1985, Ch. 689, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

10723.

Upon the approval of the trustees the authorized employees of the trustees may, when proceeding upon the basis of day’s labor, let any subdivision or unit of the work by contract upon informal bids; but such work shall be let only to a holder of a valid state contractor’s license unless such work is exempt from such licensing requirement by any other provision of law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10724.

Bids may be received and contracts awarded on a unit basis, that is, the bids compared upon the basis of estimates of the quantities of the work to be done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10725.

Except in unit basis contracts, contracts shall not be made exceeding in amount the estimates of costs approved by the trustees. Plans and specifications and estimates of costs, including expense of advertising and inspection, shall not be approved by the trustees requiring a greater expenditure of money than is appropriated for the specific purpose in the law authorizing the expenditure.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10726.

The trustees may receive bids for the construction of several public works projects at the California State University as a single project. Where more than one appropriation has been made for the several projects united as a single project under the provisions of this section, payments for the single project shall be made from the separate appropriations on such proportional basis as may be determined by the trustees and approved by the Department of Finance.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 34, Sec. 37.   (SB 860)   Effective June 20, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Advertisement for Bids [10740. - 10743.]

10740.

When it appears from the estimates of cost that the estimated contract price of any project will not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), the trustees may direct that public notice to bidders be given as follows:

(a) By publication for two consecutive insertions in a weekly trade paper of general circulation, published either in Los Angeles or San Francisco, devoted primarily to the dissemination of contract news among contracting firms; and

(b) Once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the project is located, or, if located in more than one county in such a newspaper in a county in which a major portion of the work is to be done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10741.

The notices shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and describe in general terms the work to be done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10742.

If it appears that the estimated contract price will exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), public notice to bidders shall be given by publication once a week for at least two consecutive weeks, or once a week for more than two consecutive weeks if such longer period of advertising is deemed necessary by the trustees, next preceding the day set for the receiving of bids:

(a) In two trade papers of general circulation, one published in Los Angeles and one in San Francisco, devoted primarily to the dissemination of contract and building news among contracting and building material supply firms; or

(b) In one newspaper of general
 circulation published in the county in which the major portion of the project is located, and in one such trade paper published in the county group, as defined in Section 187 of the Streets and Highways Code, in which the work is to be done; or

(c) Electronically on the California State University’s Internet Web site.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 34, Sec. 38.   (SB 860)   Effective June 20, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

10743.

The notices shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and that the bids will be required for the entire project and for the performance of segregate designated parts of the entire project, when the trustees determine that segregation is advisable.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Bids and Bidders [10760. - 10767.]

10760.

The trustees may require, and on contracts the estimated cost of which exceeds the value of a minor capital outlay project for which, pursuant to the first paragraph of Section 10108, the services of the Department of General Services are not required and a state agency or department is authorized to carry out its own project, the trustees shall require, from prospective bidders, answers to questions contained in a standard form of questionnaire and financial statement including a complete statement of the prospective bidder’s financial ability and experience in performing public works projects. When completed, the questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which pleadings in civil actions are verified.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2004, Ch. 417, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2005.)
-------------------------------------------

10761.

The trustees shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders, on the basis of the standard questionnaires and financial statements, in respect to the size of the contracts upon which each bidder is qualified to bid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10762.

In all projects for road, street, and bridge work where federal funds are involved and where a bidder is required to be and has been prequalified pursuant to Sections 10760 and 10761, no bid submitted or contract thereafter awarded shall be invalidated by the failure of the bidder or contractor to be properly licensed in accordance with the laws of this state, nor shall any such contractor be denied payment under any such contract because of such failure; provided, however, that the first payment for work or material under such contract shall not be made by the Controller unless and until the Registrar of Contractors certifies to him that the records of the Contractors’ State License Board indicate that such contractor was or became properly licensed between the time of bid opening and the making of the certification. Any bidder or contractor not so licensed shall be subject to all legal penalties imposed by such laws, including, but not limited to, any appropriate disciplinary action by the Contractors’ State License Board, and the trustees shall include a statement to that effect in the standard form of prequalification questionnaire and financial statement.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10763.

The questionnaires and financial statements are not public records and are not open to public inspection.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10764.

The trustees shall furnish to each bidder a standard proposal form, which, when filled out and executed, may be submitted as the bid. Bids not presented on forms so furnished shall be disregarded. The trustees shall not furnish proposal forms to any person who is required to submit and has not submitted a questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification at least five days prior to the date fixed for publicly opening sealed bids and been prequalified for at least one day prior to that date.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10765.

(a) All bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security: cash, a cashier’s check, certified check, or a bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the trustees. The security shall be in an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the amount bid. A bid shall not be considered unless one of the forms of bidder’s security is enclosed with it.

(b) A bid described in subdivision (a) may be submitted electronically in accordance with Section 1601, but only if the bidder submits the bidder’s security required by subdivision (a) within 24 hours after the opening of bids.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2007, Ch. 427, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2008.)
-------------------------------------------

10766.

Whether or not bids are opened exactly at the time fixed in the public notice for opening bids, a bid shall not be received after that time.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10767.

Any bid may be withdrawn at any time prior to the time fixed in the public notice for the opening of bids only by written request for the withdrawal of the bid filed with the trustees. The request shall be executed by the bidder or his or her duly authorized representative. The withdrawal of a bid does not prejudice the right of the bidder to file a new bid.

This section does not authorize the withdrawal of any bid after the time fixed in the public notice for the opening of bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 5. Award of Contracts [10780. - 10785.]

10780.

On the day named in the public notice the trustees shall publicly open the sealed bids and award the contracts to the lowest responsible bidders.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10780.5.

The trustees may require a bid for a public works contract to include prices for items that may be added to, or deducted from, the scope of work in the contract for which the bid is being submitted. Whenever additive or deductive items are included in a bid, the bid solicitation shall specify which one of the following methods will be used to determine the lowest bid. In the absence of such a specification, only the method provided by subdivision (a) will be used:

(a) The lowest bid shall be the lowest bid price on the base contract without consideration of the prices on the additive or deductive items.

(b) The lowest bid shall be the lowest total of the bid prices on the base contract and those additive or deductive items that were specifically identified in the bid solicitation as being used for the purpose of determining the lowest bid price.

(c) The lowest bid shall be the lowest total of the bid prices on the base contract and those additive or deductive items that, when taken in order from a specifically identified list of those items in the solicitation, and added to, or subtracted from, the base contract, are less than, or equal to, a funding amount publicly disclosed by the trustees before the first bid is opened.

(d) The lowest bid shall be determined in a manner that prevents any information that would identify any of the bidders or proposed subcontractors or suppliers from being revealed to the public entity before the ranking of all bidders from lowest to highest has been determined.

A responsible bidder who submitted the lowest bid as determined by this section shall be awarded the contract, if it is awarded. This section does not preclude the trustees from adding to or deducting from the contract any of the additive or deductive items after the lowest responsible bidder has been determined.

(e) Nothing in this section shall preclude the prequalification of subcontractors.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 455, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

10781.

If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract, the bidder’s security shall be forfeited to the state. The cash or proceeds shall be deposited in the fund out of which the expenses of preparation and printing of the plans and specifications, estimates of cost, and publication of notice are paid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10782.

If the trustees deem it is for the best interest of the state, they may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder.

If the second lowest responsible bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the trustees may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder. 

On the failure or refusal of the second or third lowest bidder, to whom a contract is so awarded, to execute it, the bidder’s security shall be likewise forfeited to the state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10783.

The failure of the successful bidder to furnish any bond required by law, within the time fixed for execution of the contract, constitutes a failure to execute the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10784.

The bidder’s security of the second and third lowest responsible bidders may be withheld until the contract has been finally executed. The cash, cashier’s checks, and certified checks submitted by all other unsuccessful bidders shall be returned to them within 10 days after the contract is awarded, and their bidders’ bonds shall be of no further effect.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10785.

If the trustees deem the acceptance of the lowest responsible bid or bids is not for the best interests of the state, they may reject all bids and proceed by day’s labor or advertise for other bids in the manner required by this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7. Contract Requirements [10820. - 10828.]

10820.

Every contract awarded under this chapter shall be submitted to the Attorney General or the attorney appointed according to law and authorized to represent the trustees. Such a contract is not binding on the state until the appropriate attorney finds it to be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and endorses such finding thereon.

A certified copy of each contract shall be filed with the Controller, but the failure to so file does not invalidate it.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10821.

Every contract shall provide for the filing of separate performance and payment bonds by the contractor executed by an admitted surety insurer, subject to the approval of the trustees.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10822.

Each bond shall be in a sum equal to at least one-half of the contract price, except as otherwise provided in Section 9554 of the Civil Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 46.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

10823.

The payment bond shall secure the payment of the claims of laborers, mechanics, or materialmen employed on the work under the contract and shall contain all other provisions required by law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10824.

The performance bond shall guarantee the faithful performance of the contract by the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10825.

No payment shall be made upon the contract to the contractor or any assignee of the contractor until an order by the trustees that a sufficient surety be substituted on the bond, or that a new, additional, or supplemental bond be given, is satisfied.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10826.

Every contract shall contain a provision in regard to the time when the whole or any specified portion of the work contemplated shall be completed, and shall provide that for each day completion is delayed beyond the specified time, the contractor shall forfeit and pay to the state a specified sum of money, to be deducted from any payments due or to become due to the contractor. The sum so specified is valid as liquidated damages unless manifestly unreasonable under the circumstances existing at the time the contract was made. A contract for a road project may also provide for the payment of extra compensation to the contractor, as a bonus for completion prior to the specified time, such provision, if used, to be included in the specifications and to clearly set forth the basis for such payment.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10827.

Every contract shall provide that the trustees may make changes in the plans and specifications pursuant to this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10828.

Notwithstanding any other law, commencing January 1, 2024, the California State University shall not approve a health benefit plan contract for employees that does not comply with the contraceptive coverage requirements of Sections 1367.25 and 1367.255 of the Health and Safety Code, and Sections 10123.1945 and 10123.196 of the Insurance Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 630, Sec. 20.   (SB 523)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7.8. Conflict of Interest [10830. - 10833.]

10830.

(a) No person, firm, or subsidiary thereof who has been awarded a consulting services contract may submit a bid or be awarded a contract on or after July 1, 2003, for the provision of services, the procurement of goods or supplies, or any other related action that is required, suggested, or otherwise deemed appropriate in the end product of the consulting services contract.

(b) This section does not apply to any person, firm, or subsidiary thereof who is awarded a subcontract of a consulting services contract that amounts to no more than 10 percent of the total monetary value of the consulting services contract.

(c) This section does not apply to consulting services contracts subject to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10831.

No officer or employee of the California State University shall engage in any employment, activity, or enterprise for which the officer or employee receives compensation or in which the officer or employee has a financial interest if that employment, activity, or enterprise is sponsored or funded, or sponsored and funded, by any California State University department through or by a California State University contract unless the employment, activity, or enterprise is within the course and scope of the officer’s or employee’s regular California State University employment. No officer or employee in the California State University shall contract on his or her own individual behalf as an independent contractor with any California State University department to provide services or goods. This section shall not apply to officers or employees of the California State University with teaching or research responsibilities.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10832.

(a) No retired, dismissed, separated, or formerly employed person of the California State University employed with the California State University or otherwise appointed to serve in the California State University may enter into a contract in which he or she engaged in any of the negotiations, transactions, planning, arrangements, or any part of the decisionmaking process relevant to the contract while employed in any capacity by any California State University department. The prohibition of this subdivision shall apply to a person only during the two-year period beginning on the date the person left California State University employment.

(b) For a period of 12 months following the date of his or her retirement, dismissal, or separation from the California State University, no person employed in the California State University or otherwise appointed to serve in the California State University may enter into a contract with any California State University department, if he or she was employed by that department in a policymaking position in the same general subject area as the proposed contract within the 12-month period prior to his or her retirement, dismissal, or separation. The prohibition of this subdivision shall not apply to a contract requiring the person’s services as an expert witness in a civil case or to a contract for the continuation of an attorney’s services on a matter he or she was involved with prior to leaving the California State University.

(c) This section does not prohibit the rehire or reappointment of California State University employees after retirement, consistent with California State University administrative policies, nor does it apply to inventors and authors of intellectual property licensed under technology transfer agreements.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

10833.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b), each contractor who enters into a contract with a California State University campus for ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more shall be assigned an identification number by the president of that California State University campus. Each contractor who has been assigned a number shall list it on each contract the contractor enters into with the California State University campus, regardless of the amount of the contract. In the case of a corporation or firm, the president’s assigned number shall be used exclusively on each contract with that president’s campus. The assigned number shall remain unchanged regardless of future name changes.

(b) If the identification numbers cannot be tracked centrally by the Trustees of the California State University, then the trustees, and not the presidents, shall assign the identification numbers.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 699, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 8. Modifications; Performance; Payment [10840. - 10853.]

10840.

The trustees may increase or decrease quantities of work to be done under a unit basis contract during the progress of the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10841.

The trustees may cause the insertion of provisions in any contract for the performance of such extra work and the furnishing of materials therefor by the contractor as the trustees require for the proper completion or construction of the whole work contemplated, if the bidders have equal opportunity of knowing the proposed terms for the extra work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10842.

The trustees may grant such extensions of time for completion as they deem for the best interests of the state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10843.

If the trustees deem that a contractor has failed to supply an adequate working force, or material of proper quality, or has failed in any other respect to prosecute the work with the diligence and force specified by the contract, the trustees may:

(a) After written notice of at least five days to the contractor, specifying the defaults to be remedied, provide any such labor or materials and deduct the cost from any money due or to become due to the contractor under the contract; or 

(b) If the trustees consider that the failure is sufficient ground for such action, they may give written notice of at least five days to the contractor and the contractor’s sureties, that if the defaults are not remedied the contractor’s control over the work will be terminated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10844.

If the defaults are not remedied within the time specified in the notice, the contractor’s control shall terminate as of the expiration of that time.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10845.

Upon such termination, the trustees may take possession of and use all or any part of the contractor’s materials, tools, equipment, and appliances upon the premises to complete the contract. Thereupon, the trustees may permit the surety to complete or cause the contract work to be completed, or they may direct that all or any part of the work be completed by day’s labor or by employment of other contractors on informal contracts, or both.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10846.

Such informal contracts may be awarded only after a proposal form has been prepared, a copy is served upon the contractor whose control has been terminated, and upon his or her surety, and three days allowed thereafter so that he or she may cause others to bid. Any person who is prequalified therefor under Article 4 (commencing with Section 10760) of this chapter may bid on informal contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10847.

The provisions of this chapter, except as to prequalifications, are not applicable to the award of informal contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10848.

If the control of a contractor is terminated or he or she abandons the work, and the work is performed by day’s labor or informal contract as provided in Section 10845, he or she is not entitled to receive any portion of the amount to be paid under the contract until it is fully completed. After completion, if the unpaid balance exceeds the sum of the amount expended by the state in finishing the work, plus all damages sustained or to be sustained by the state, the excess not otherwise required by law to be retained shall be paid to the contractor, but if such sum exceeds the unpaid balance, the contractor and his or her surety are liable to the state for the excess. If the surety completes the contract work, as provided in Section 10845, such surety shall be subrogated to money due under the contract and to money which shall become due in the course of completion by the surety, to the extent provided by law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10849.

On the completion of the contract, the original contractor is entitled to the return of all his or her unused materials, and his or her equipment, tools, and appliances, except that he or she shall have no claim on account of usual and ordinary depreciation, loss, and wear and tear.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10850.

The notices required by this article may be served on the contractor or on his or her agent having charge of the work, personally, or by registered mail addressed to the contractor or his or her agent, or, if neither can be located or their addresses are unknown, by posting in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10851.

Payments upon contracts shall be made as the trustees prescribe upon estimates made and approved by the trustees, but progress payments shall not be made in excess of 95 percent of the percentage of actual work completed plus a like percentage of the value of material delivered on the ground or stored subject to or under the control of the state, and unused. The trustees shall withhold not less than 5 percent of the contract price until final completion and acceptance of the project. The Controller shall draw warrants upon estimates so made and approved by the trustees and the Treasurer shall pay them.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10852.

At the request and expense of the contractor, and with the approval of the trustees, any amount withheld pursuant to Section 10851 may be deposited with the Treasurer as the escrow agent, who shall pay such moneys to the contractor upon the placing of securities eligible for the investment of state funds under Section 16430 of the Government Code or bank certificates of deposit into such escrow account by the contractor.

“Approval of the trustees,” as used in this section, means that the trustees may, in their discretion, allow or deny the request of the contractor to avail itself of the provisions of this section and that the trustees may, in their discretion, allow the request of the contractor upon the satisfaction of conditions which may be specified by the trustees.

The contractor shall be beneficial owner of any securities in an escrow account pursuant to this section and shall receive any interest thereon.

Any escrow agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall contain as a minimum, the following provisions:

(a) The amount of securities to be deposited; such amount shall not be less than the amount which would otherwise be withheld pursuant to Section 10851;

(b) The terms and conditions of conversion to cash in case of the default of the contractor; and

(c) The termination of the escrow upon completion of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10853.

(a) If the trustees fail to make a progress payment on a contract within 39 days after receipt of an undisputed and properly submitted payment request from a contractor on a construction contract, the trustees shall pay interest to the contractor equivalent to the legal rate set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the payment is not made within 39 days of receipt of the contractor’s request, and the Controller has processed the payment within 14 days of the receipt of the request, the trustees shall pay interest to the contractor equivalent to the legal rate as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the payment is not made within 39 days of receipt of the contractor’s request, and the trustees have processed the payment within 25 days after the receipt of the request, the Controller shall pay interest equivalent to the legal rate as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

(b) Upon receipt of a payment request, the trustees shall act in accordance with the following:

(1) Each payment request shall be reviewed by the trustees as soon as practicable after receipt for the purpose of determining that the payment request is a proper payment request.

(2) Any payment request determined not to be a proper request suitable for payment shall be returned to the contractor as soon as practicable, but not later than seven days after receipt. A request returned pursuant to this paragraph shall be accompanied by a document setting forth in writing the reasons why the payment request is not proper.

(3) Upon request from the trustees, the Controller may elect to expedite each payment request and may charge the trustees an appropriate amount, as determined by the Controller, for costs incurred in expediting the payment request.

(c) The number of days available to the trustees to make a payment without incurring interest shall be reduced by the number of days by which the trustees exceed the seven-day return requirement set forth in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).

(d) A properly submitted payment request shall be defined as the date upon which the trustees receive a payment request, certified in accordance with the contract, at the address identified in the contract.

(e) For purposes of this section:

(1) A “progress payment” includes all payments due contractors, except that portion of the final payment withheld pursuant to Section 10851.

(2) A payment request shall be considered properly executed if funds are available for payment of the payment request and payment is not delayed due to an audit inquiry by the Controller.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 799, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 9. Offenses [10870. - 11005.]

10870.

Any officer or employee of the trustees who corruptly performs any official act to the injury of the state, is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10871.

Any contractor or his or her agent or employee who corruptly permits the violation of any contract awarded under this chapter to the injury of the state is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10872.

Any subcontractor or agent or employee of any contractor or subcontractor, who has knowledge of any work being done in violation of any contract under this chapter and does not immediately notify the trustees or the inspector or resident engineer upon the project of the violation, is guilty of a felony.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

10873.

Such felonies are punishable by imprisonment pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170 of the Penal Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 15, Sec. 556.   (AB 109)   Effective April 4, 2011.   Operative October 1, 2011, by Sec. 636 of Ch. 15, as amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 39, Sec. 68.)
-------------------------------------------

10874.

Such persons are also liable to the state for double the amount the state may have lost, or be liable to lose by reason of the acts made crimes by this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

11005.

“Spouse,” as used in this code, includes “registered domestic partner,” as required by Section 297.5 of the Family Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2016, Ch. 50, Sec. 91.   (SB 1005)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3. Acquisition of Information Technology Goods and Services  [12100. - 12113.]

12100.

(a) The Legislature finds that the unique aspects of information technology goods and services and their importance to state programs warrant a separate body of governing statutes. The Legislature further finds that this separate body of governing statutes should enable the timely acquisition of information technology goods and services to meet the state’s needs in the most value-effective manner.

(b) (1) All contracts for the acquisition of information technology goods and services related to information technology projects defined in Chapter 4800 of the State Administrative Manual shall be made by or under the supervision of the Department of Technology consistent with this chapter.

(2) The Department of Technology shall have the authority necessary for the acquisition of information technology goods and services related to information technology projects as prescribed in this chapter.

(c) The Department of Technology shall have the final authority in the determination of information technology procurement policy.

(d) The Department of Technology shall have the final authority in the determination of information technology procurement procedures applicable to acquisitions subject to subdivision (b) and telecommunications procurements made pursuant to Section 12120.

(e) The Department of Technology shall have the final authority in the determination of procurement policy in telecommunications procurements made pursuant to Section 12120.

(f) Except as expressly provided in subdivision (b), all contracts for the acquisition of information technology goods or services, whether by lease or purchase, shall be made by or under the supervision of the Department of General Services.

(g) Except as expressly provided in subdivision (d), the Department of General Services shall have the final authority in the determination of information technology procurement procedures. This includes, but is not limited to, the following:

(1) Acquisitions delegated by the Department of General Services pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 12102.2, if the Department of Technology has also delegated project authority pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 11546 of the Government Code.

(2) Acquisitions of information technology goods or services relating to information technology projects delegated by the Department of Technology under subdivision (b) of Section 11546 of the Government Code, but not delegated by the Department of General Services under paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 12102.2.

(3) If the Department of Technology has not delegated project authority pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 11546 of the Government Code, but the Department of General Services has delegated acquisition authority pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 12102.2 and the Department of Technology has authorized the state agency to conduct the acquisition.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 37, Sec. 50.   (AB 1817)   Effective June 27, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

12100.5.

The Regents of the University of California, the Trustees of the California State University, and the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges shall not be subject to this chapter except that the trustees shall develop policies and procedures maintained in its state university administrative manual and the board shall adopt policies and procedures maintained in its administrative manual that further the legislative policies for contracting expressed in this chapter but without the involvement of the Director of Finance, the Director of General Services, the Department of Finance, the Department of General Services, the Director of Technology, or the Department of Technology.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 52.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12100.6.

The Trustees of the California State University are subject to Article 1.5 (commencing with Section 10115) of Chapter 1. The contents of any report that the trustees are required to submit to the Governor and the Legislature pursuant to that article shall be organized so that, whenever applicable, each campus is individually featured.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1097, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

12100.7.

As used in this chapter:

(a) “Multiple award schedule” (MAS) is an agreement established between the General Services Administration of the United States and certain suppliers to do business under specific prices, terms, and conditions for specified goods, information technology, and services.

(b) “Multiple award” means a contract of indefinite quantity for one or more similar goods, information technology, or services to more than one supplier.

(c) “Procedures” means the rules, methods, and practices to be followed in conducting information technology procurements.

(d) “Policies” means determining what information technology goods or services are to be purchased and by whom.

(e) For purposes of this chapter, “value-effective acquisition” may be defined to include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) The operational cost that the state would incur if the bid or proposal is accepted.

(2) Quality of the product or service, or its technical competency.

(3) Reliability of delivery and implementation schedules.

(4) The maximum facilitation of data exchange and systems integration.

(5) Warranties, guarantees, and return
 policy.

(6) Supplier financial stability.

(7) Consistency of the proposed solution with the state’s planning documents and announced strategic program direction.

(8) Quality and effectiveness of business solution and approach.

(9) Industry and program experience.

(10) Prior record of supplier performance.

(11) Supplier expertise with engagements of similar scope and complexity.

(12) Extent and quality of the proposed participation and acceptance by all user groups.

(13) Proven development
 methodologies and tools.

(14) Innovative use of current technologies and quality results.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 53.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12101.

It is the intent of the Legislature that policies and procedures developed by the Department of Technology and the Department of General Services in accordance with this chapter provide for the following:

(a) The expeditious and value-effective acquisition of information technology goods and services to satisfy state requirements.

(b) The acquisition of information technology goods and services within a competitive framework.

(c) The delegation of authority by the Department of General Services to each state agency that has demonstrated to the department’s satisfaction the ability to conduct value-effective
 information technology goods and services acquisitions.

(d) The exclusion from state bid processes, at the state’s option, of any supplier having failed to meet prior contractual requirements related to information technology goods and services.

(e) The review and resolution of protests submitted by any bidders with respect to any information technology goods and services acquisitions.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 54.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12101.2.

The Department of General Services shall prenegotiate the repetitively used terms and conditions in the state’s model contract with each interested vendor who bids or proposes on electronic data processing or telecommunications procurements. The contract language shall be kept on file, as a matter of public record, and shall remain operational until either the state or the vendor provides 30 days’ notice to the other party that new negotiations are deemed appropriate.

If, for a particular procurement, the state seeks to make any further changes to either the negotiated or the standard contract language, or both, it shall identify those changes to each bidder or proposer prior to the due date for the bid or proposal. If for a
 particular procurement, a bidder or proposer seeks to propose a negotiated change or standard contract language change, it shall make this identification within the timeframe identified in the solicitation document.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 55.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12101.5.

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature that agencies of the state use an acquisition method that is compatible with their short- and long-term fiscal needs in contracts relating to commodities and information technology goods and services. State agencies should be able to specify their anticipated life cycle requirements that would become one of the criteria for contractor selection. These agencies should be given the choice of suppliers to meet statewide standardization needs, unique service requirements, application requirements, and long-term satisfaction criteria. There is a need for the state to enter into long-term contracts with annual cancellation and fund-out clauses, as required, to protect the state’s interests as well as provide the
 option for multiyear renewals to encourage suppliers to develop higher levels of service and support throughout the contracts.

(b) The state may utilize multiple awards, including federal General Service Administration Multiple Awards Schedules and master agreements or contracts for goods, information technology, services, or consulting services. For purposes of this subdivision, a multiple award is an award of an indefinite quantity contract for one or more similar goods, information technology, or services to more than one supplier. Except for possible multiple awards as permitted by this subdivision, and except as described in subdivision (d), all the requirements of this chapter pertaining to other types of information technology acquisitions shall be followed. The Department of General Services shall administer this section and ensure that multiple award schedules are in compliance with all other applicable statutes.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, state agencies, in exercising their contracting authority delegated by the Department of General Services, may contract with suppliers who have multiple award schedules with the General Services Administration of the United States on the same terms, conditions, and prices if the supplier is willing to do so. The Department of General Services may also develop multiple award schedules or agreements for use by state agencies in the same manner. The Department of General Services shall determine the delegation contracting authority for agencies wishing to use multiple award schedules.

(d) For contracts related to information technology integration or development projects that generate revenues or achieve savings over a quantifiable baseline of existing costs, state agencies shall consider and may incorporate performance-based or
 share-in-savings contract terms to manage risks and create incentives for successful contract performance. Performance-based or share-in-savings contracts may have the following characteristics, among others:

(1) Contract terms that specify business outcomes to be achieved, not the solution to be provided.

(2) Contract terms that structure the contract to maintain maximum vendor commitment to project success and minimize risk to the state by sharing risk with the private sector.

(3) Utilization of “best value” evaluation methods, which means to select the solution that will achieve the best result based on business performance measures, not necessarily the lowest price.

(4) Contract terms that base payments to the vendor primarily on achieving
 predefined performance measures.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 56.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12101.7.

(a) Notwithstanding the sealed bidding provisions of this chapter, reverse auctions may be utilized for the acquisition of information technology, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 10290.3.

(b) For purposes of this section, “reverse auction” means a competitive online solicitation process for fungible information technology in which vendors compete against each other online in real time in an open and interactive environment.

(History: Added by Stats. 2003, Ch. 266, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

12102.

(a) The Department of General Services shall maintain, in the State Administrative Manual, all policies and procedures governing the acquisition and disposal of information technology goods and services, including, but not limited to, the policies and procedures that the Department of Technology is authorized to establish for the acquisition of information technology projects. The Department of Technology shall provide a link to information technology policies and procedures in the State Administrative Manual on the homepage of the Internet Web site.

(b) Except as specified in Section 12102.1, acquisition of information technology goods and services shall be conducted through
 competitive means, except when the Director of General Services determines that (1) the goods and services proposed for acquisition are the only goods and services which can meet the state’s need, or (2) the goods and services are needed in cases of emergency where immediate acquisition is necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare, or safety. The acquisition mode to be used and the procedure to be followed shall be approved by the Director of General Services. The Department of General Services shall maintain, in the State Administrative Manual, appropriate criteria and procedures to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter. These criteria and procedures shall include acquisition and contracting guidelines to be followed by state agencies with respect to the acquisition of information technology goods and services. These guidelines may be in the form of standard formats or model formats.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 57.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12102.1.

(a) The Department of Technology shall establish in the State Administrative Manual all of the following:

(1) Policies governing the acquisition of information technology projects.

(2) Procedures governing the acquisition of information technology projects reportable under Chapter 4800 of the State Administrative Manual and not delegated under subdivision (e) of Section 12102.2.

(3) Policies and procedures governing the acquisition of telecommunications goods and services, as authorized under Section 12120.

(b) Acquisition of information technology goods and services that are subject to subdivision (a) shall be conducted through competitive means, except when the Director of Technology determines that (1) the goods and services proposed for acquisition are the only goods and services that can meet the state’s need, or (2) the goods and services are needed for an emergency and immediate acquisition and are necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare, or safety. The acquisition mode to be used and the procedure to be followed shall be approved by the Director of Technology. The Department of Technology shall establish, in the State Administrative Manual, appropriate criteria and procedures to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter. These criteria and procedures shall include acquisition and contracting guidelines to be followed by state agencies with respect to the acquisition of information technology projects that are reportable under State Administrative Manual Section
 4800 et seq. These guidelines may be in the form of standard formats or model formats.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 58.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12102.2.

(a) Contract awards for all large-scale systems integration projects shall be based on the proposal that provides the most value-effective solution to the state’s requirements, as determined by the evaluation criteria contained in the solicitation document. Evaluation criteria for the acquisition of information technology goods and services, including systems integration, shall provide for the selection of a contractor on an objective basis not limited to cost alone.

(1) The Department of Technology shall invite active participation, review, advice, comment, and assistance from the private sector and state agencies in developing procedures to streamline and to make the acquisition process more efficient, including, but not limited to, consideration of
 comprehensive statements in the request for proposals of the business needs and governmental functions, access to studies, planning documents, feasibility study reports and draft requests for proposals applicable to solicitations, minimizing the time and cost of the proposal submittal and selection process, and development of a procedure for submission and evaluation of a single proposal rather than multiple proposals.

(2) Solicitations for acquisitions based on evaluation criteria other than cost alone shall provide that sealed cost proposals shall be submitted and that they shall be opened at a time and place designated in the solicitation for bids and proposals. Evaluation of all criteria, other than cost, shall be completed before the time designated for public opening of cost proposals, and the results of the completed evaluation shall be published immediately before the opening of cost proposals. The state’s contact person for
 administration of the solicitation shall be identified in the solicitation for bids and proposals, and that person shall execute a certificate under penalty of perjury, which shall be made a permanent part of the official contract file, that all cost proposals received by the state have been maintained, sealed and under lock and key, until the time cost proposals are opened.

(b) The acquisition of hardware acquired independently of a system integration project may be made on the basis of lowest cost meeting all other specifications.

(c) The 5 percent small business preference provided for in Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 14835) of Part 5.5 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code and the regulations implementing that chapter shall be accorded to all qualifying small businesses.

(d) For all transactions
 formally advertised, evaluation of bidders’ proposals for the purpose of determining contract award for information technology goods shall provide for consideration of a bidder’s best financing alternatives, including lease or purchase alternatives, if any bidder so requests, not less than 30 days prior to the date of final bid submission, unless the acquiring agency can prove to the satisfaction of the Department of General Services that a particular financing alternative should not be so considered.

(e) Notwithstanding Section 12100:

(1) Acquisition authority may be delegated by the Director of General Services, in consultation with the Department of Technology, to any state agency that has been determined to be capable of effective use of that authority. This authority may be limited by the Department of General Services. A state agency shall not conduct an acquisition for
 information technology goods and services related to an information technology project under delegated acquisition authority pursuant to this section unless the Department of Technology has done one of the following:

(A) Delegated project authority to that state agency pursuant to Section 11546 of the Government Code.

(B) Authorized the state agency to conduct the acquisition.

(2) Acquisitions conducted under delegated acquisition authority shall be reviewed by the Department of General Services on a selective basis.

(3) The Department of General Services shall maintain procedures for complying with the State Agency Buy Recycled Campaign (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 12153)). The procedures shall include procedures for meeting the minimum recycled
 content requirements in state contracting as established by CalRecycle pursuant to Section 12209 and procedures for complying with reporting requirements as established by CalRecycle pursuant to Section 12211.

(f) To the extent practical, the solicitation documents shall provide for a contract to be written to enable acquisition of additional items to avoid essentially redundant acquisition processes when it can be determined that it is economical to do so.

(g) Protest procedures shall be developed to provide bidders an opportunity to protest any formal, competitive acquisition conducted in accordance with this chapter. The procedures shall provide that protests must be filed no later than five working days after the issuance of an intent to award. Authority to protest may be limited to participating bidders. The Director of Technology, or a person designated by the director, may
 consider and decide on initial protests of bids for information technology projects conducted by the Department of Technology and telecommunications procurement made pursuant to Section 12120. The Director of General Services, or a person designated by the director, may consider and decide on initial protests of all other information technology acquisitions. A decision regarding an initial protest shall be final. If, before the last day to protest, any bidder who has submitted an offer files a protest with the department against the awarding of the contract on the ground that their bid or proposal should have been selected in accordance with the selection criteria in the solicitation document, the contract shall not be awarded until either the protest has been withdrawn or the Department of General Services has made a final decision as to the action to be taken relating to the protest. Within 10 calendar days after filing a protest, the protesting bidder shall file with the Department of General Services a
 full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts in support thereof.

(h) Consistent with the procedures established and administered by the Department of General Services, information technology goods that have been determined to be surplus to state needs shall be disposed of in a manner that will best serve the interests of the state. Procedures governing the disposal of surplus goods may include auction or transfer to local governmental entities.

(i) A supplier may be excluded from bid processes if the supplier’s performance with respect to a previously awarded contract has been unsatisfactory, as determined by the state in accordance with established procedures that shall be maintained in the State Administrative Manual. This exclusion shall not exceed 36 months for any one determination of unsatisfactory performance. Any
 supplier excluded in accordance with this section shall be reinstated as a qualified supplier at any time during this 36-month period, upon demonstrating to the Department of General Services’ satisfaction that the problems that resulted in the supplier’s exclusion have been corrected.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 2.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12102.3.

(a) The department shall conduct a postevaluation of each contract for the acquisition of information technology services totaling five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) or more that it executes.

(b) The department shall evaluate the performance of the contractor in doing the work for which the contract was awarded. The department
 shall base a postevaluation on objective facts and support them with program and contract performance data. The Department of Technology and the Department of General Services shall jointly develop a standard form or forms and the procedures to implement this section. Each department shall use the standard form or forms that contain objective postevaluation factors or metrics appropriate to the nature of the information technology service and project type. In developing a standard postevaluation form or forms
 under this subdivision, the Department of Technology and the Department of General Services shall jointly gather feedback from stakeholders in the information technology industry to ensure that the use of any factors or metrics on the standard form or forms are appropriate to the nature of the information technology service or project type. A public official who signs a postevaluation shall confirm its accuracy. The department shall use a standard form developed pursuant to this subdivision
 to report on all of the following:

(1) Whether the contracted work was completed within the time specified in the contract.

(2) Whether the contracted work
 was completed within the budget specified in the contract.

(3) Factors outside the control of the contractor that caused difficulties in contractor performance.

(4) Other information the department, the Department of Technology, or the Department of General Services may require.

(c) If the contractor’s performance was judged unsatisfactory on any of the factors
 or metrics specified in a standard postevaluation form developed pursuant to subdivision (b) and was not mitigated by any factors or metrics outside the control of the contractor that may have caused difficulties in the contractor’s performance, the postevaluation shall be considered unsatisfactory for the purposes of subdivisions (e) and (f).

(d) The postevaluation shall be prepared within 60 days of the completion of the contract.

(e) Postevaluations shall remain on file at the offices of the department for a period of 36 months following contract completion.
 The department conducting the postevaluation shall place one copy of the postevaluation form in the department’s contract file and, if the department is not the Department of Technology, send one copy of the form to the Department of Technology within five working days of the completion of the postevaluation. The postevaluations and contractor responses on file shall not be public records. The Department of Technology shall act as a central depository for all departments making postevaluations or desiring information on a contractor’s record with the state and shall send a copy of any postevaluation report and response to the contracting manager or contracting officer of any department, upon request. Failure by a department to send a postevaluation to the Department of Technology may be grounds for the rejection of future delegation of
 information technology projects pursuant to Section 11546 of the Government Code.

(f) (1) Upon submitting an unsatisfactory postevaluation to the Department of Technology, the department shall notify and send a copy of the postevaluation to the contractor within 15 days. 

(2) A contractor may comment on a negative postevaluation. Comments made pursuant to
 this paragraph shall be submitted to the department and the Department of Technology, to be attached to and filed with the copies of the postevaluation required to be filed pursuant to subdivision (e).

(g) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Department” means the state agency that receives the information technology services.

(2) “Information technology services” means services, including, but not limited to, information technology personal services and information technology consulting services, acquired in connection with an information technology project, as defined in Section 4819.2 of the State Administrative
 Manual.

(History: Added by Stats. 2019, Ch. 496, Sec. 1.   (AB 971)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

12103.

In addition to the mandatory requirements enumerated in Sections 12102, 12102.1, and 12102.2, the acquisition policies and procedures developed by the Department of Technology and the Department of General Services in accordance with this chapter may provide for the following:

(a) Price negotiation with respect to contracts entered into in accordance with this chapter.

(b) System or equipment component performance, or availability standards, including an assessment of the added cost to the state to receive contractual guarantee of a level of performance.

(c) Requirement of a bond or assessment of a cost penalty with
 respect to a contract or consideration of a contract offered by a supplier whose performance has been determined unsatisfactory in accordance with established procedures maintained in the State Administrative Manual as required by Section 12102.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 60.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12103.5.

For those information technology purchases for which the Department of General Services or the Department of Technology determines that a request for proposal (RFP) is appropriate, the controlling department, as specified under Section 12100, shall identify and document the following, with respect to information technology procurements, prior to releasing the RFP:

(a) Identify the legislative mandate, state business, or operational reason for the information technology procurement.

(b) Identify the existing business processes currently used to accomplish the legislative mandate, state business, or operational reason.

(c) Identify the most important priorities for the information technology project to accomplish.

(d) Identify what current technology is being used and how it is being used.

(e) If the data used in a proposed information technology system comes from multiple sources, identify the existing business processes or technical systems that produce and maintain the source data to ensure interoperability.

(f) Identify how the new information technology project leverages existing technology investments while accomplishing its business objectives.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 61.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12104.

(a) (1) The State Contracting Manual shall set forth all procedures and methods that shall be used by the state when seeking to obtain bids for the acquisition of information technology.

(2) Revisions to the manual must be publicly announced, including, but not limited to, postings on the Internet Web site homepage of the Department of General Services. The Department of Technology shall provide a link to the State Contracting Manual on its Internet Web site homepage.

(b) The Department of General Services and the Department of Technology in accordance with this chapter shall develop, implement, and maintain standardized methods for the
 development of all information technology requests for proposals.

(c) All information technology requests for proposals shall be reviewed by the Department of Technology prior to release to the public.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 62.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12104.5.

(a) All rules and requirements governing an information technology acquisition, for which the Department of General Services or the Department of Technology determines that a request for proposal (RFP) is appropriate, shall be communicated in writing to all vendors that have expressed an intent to bid and shall be posted in a public location. Any changes to the rules and requirements governing that RFP shall be communicated in writing to all vendors that have expressed an intent to bid and shall be posted in a public location. Requirements other than those provided by law or outside of the published RFP and posted addendums shall not be used to score bids.

(b) (1) All requests for proposals shall
 contain the following statement:

“It is unlawful for any person engaged in business within this state to sell or use any article or product as a “loss leader” as defined in Section 17030 of the Business and Professions Code.”

(2) The Department of General Services shall post in the State Contracting Manual instructions for including the statement required by paragraph (1) in all affected contracts.

(3) The statement required by paragraph (1) shall be deemed to be part of a request for proposal even if the statement is inadvertently omitted from the request for proposal.

(c) The requirements of this section shall be in addition to any other requirement provided by law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 63.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12105.

The Department of General Services and the Department of Technology shall coordinate in the development of policies and procedures that implement the intent of this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 64.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12106.

The Department of General Services and the Department of Technology may, in addition to fulfilling the mandatory requirements enumerated in Sections 12102, 12102.1, and 12102.2, adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the purposes of this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 65.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12108.

Until the time that the Department of General Services and the Department of Technology have published in the State Administrative Manual the procedures required in accordance with Section 12102, acquisitions of information technology goods and services shall be accomplished in accordance with either existing State Administrative Manual procedures for the acquisition of information technology goods and services, or Article 2 (commencing with Section 14790) of Chapter 6 of Part 5.5 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code, as determined by the Department of General Services.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 66.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12109.

The Director of General Services and the Director of Technology may make the services of their respective departments under this chapter available, upon the terms and conditions that may be deemed satisfactory, to any tax-supported public agency in the state, including a school district, for assisting the agency in the acquisition of information technology goods or services.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 67.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12112.

(a) Any contract for information technology goods or services, to be manufactured or performed by the contractor especially for the state and not suitable for sale to others in the ordinary course of the contractor’s business may provide, on the terms and conditions that the controlling department, as specified in Section 12100, deems necessary to protect the state’s interests, for progress payments for work performed and costs incurred at the contractor’s shop or plant, provided that not less than 10 percent of the contract price is required to be withheld until final delivery and acceptance of the goods or services. Notwithstanding this subdivision, if the department determines that lesser withholding levels are appropriate based upon an evaluation of risk determined under subdivision
 (b) and the contract price is ten million dollars ($10,000,000) or more, the department shall withhold no less than 5 percent of the contract price until final delivery and acceptance of the goods or services. If the department determines that lesser withholding levels are appropriate based on an evaluation of risk determined under subdivision (b) and the contract price is less than ten million dollars ($10,000,000), the department shall withhold no less than 3 percent of the contract price until final delivery and acceptance of the goods or services.

(b) The Department of General Services, in consultation with the Department of Finance, shall develop and maintain criteria for the evaluation of risk to the state that results from the acquisition of information technology. This risk analysis shall determine the need for financial protection that is in the best interest of the state, including, but not limited to, any of the following:

(1) An acceptable performance bond as described in Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 995.010) of Title 14 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

(2) Any surety as defined in Section 2787 of the Civil Code.

(3) A letter of credit as described in Division 5 (commencing with Section 5101) of the Commercial Code.

(4) Protection in the form of contract terms.

(5) Any other form of security or guaranty of performance in an amount sufficient to protect the state in the case of default by the contractor providing information technology, or any other breach or malfunction of the goods or services, or both.

(c) For purposes of this
 section, “information technology” means information technology goods or services, or both, as appropriate.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 68.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12113.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, state and local agencies may enter into agreements to pay for telecommunications services to be utilized beyond the current fiscal year. “Telecommunications services” for purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to, central office-based leased communications systems equipped with primary station lines, capable of receiving in-dialed voice and data communications and capable of out-dialing voice and data communications and any customer premised equipment, software and installation costs necessary for utilization by the state or local agency.

(b) State and local agencies may enter into financing agreements for the acquisition of telecommunications services whenever the state or local agency may derive monetary benefit and greater services as a result of its ability to acquire capital at lower interest cost than the supplier of those services can provide directly to the agency or whenever the state or local agency may obtain a reduced cost of service based on length of agreement if offered by the supplier of telecommunications service.

(c) Acquisition requirements for financing of telecommunications goods and services shall be considered to have been met whenever the financing is within the scope of public sector requests for proposals or whenever the financing is offered by a sole source provider or that provider’s assignee.

(d) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to alter or circumvent any existing acquisition procedure or requirement, nor to alter or circumvent the acquisition authority of any state or local agency.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2000, Ch. 776, Sec. 49.   Effective September 27, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3.5. Acquisition of Telecommunications Goods and Services [12120. - 12120.]

12120.

The Legislature finds and declares that, with the advent of deregulation in the telecommunications industry, substantial cost savings can be realized by the state through the specialized evaluation and acquisition of alternative telecommunications systems. Any contract for the acquisition of telecommunications services and any contract for the acquisition of telecommunications goods, whether by lease or purchase, shall be made by, or under the supervision of, the Department of Technology. Any acquisition shall be accomplished in accordance with Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100), relating to the acquisition of information technology goods and services, except to the extent any directive or provision is uniquely applicable to information technology acquisitions. The Department of Technology shall have
 responsibility for the establishment of policy and procedures for telecommunications. The Trustees of the California State University and the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges shall assume the functions of the agency with regard to acquisition of telecommunications goods and services by the California State University and the California Community Colleges, respectively. The trustees and the board shall each grant to the agency an opportunity to bid whenever the university or the college system solicits bids for telecommunications goods and services.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 69.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3.6. The Alternative Protest Pilot Project [12125. - 12129.]

12125.

There is hereby established the Alternative Protest Process to be administered by the Department of General Services and the Department of Technology in accordance with Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100) of Part 2 of Division 2 and this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 71.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12126.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, any department or agency may use the solicitation and alternative protest procedures outlined in this chapter for solicitations authorized under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10290) or Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100). The Department of General Services shall develop procedures and guidelines for the implementation of this alternative protest process.

(b) To be eligible for this alternative protest process, the contracting department shall agree to participate in the Alternative Protest Process and the Department of General Services or the Department of Technology, as appropriate, shall indicate that the proposed solicitation shall be
 conducted as part of the Alternative Protest Process prior to release of the solicitation. Submission of a bid constitutes consent for participation in the Alternative Protest Process. Any protests filed in relation to the proposed contract award shall be conducted under the procedures set forth by the Department of General Services for the Alternative Protest Process.

(c) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any bid protest conducted under this chapter shall include one or more of the following alternative procedures:

(1) The Alternative Protest Process shall not prevent the commencement of work in accordance with the terms of any other contract awarded pursuant to this chapter. A contract may be entered into pending a final decision on the protest.

(2) The Department of General Services, in bid protests
 for procurements it conducts or supervises, shall review the protest within seven days of the filing date to determine if the protest is frivolous. If determined to be frivolous, the protest shall not proceed under this chapter until the bidder posts a protest bond in an amount not less than 10 percent of the estimated contract value, as determined by the Department of General Services in the solicitation.

(3) The Department of Technology, in bid protests for procurements it conducts or supervises pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 12100 and telecommunications procurements made pursuant to Section 12120, shall review the protest within seven days of the filing date to determine if the protest is frivolous. If determined to be frivolous, the protest shall not proceed under this chapter until the bidder posts a protest bond in an amount not less than 10 percent of the estimated contract value, as determined by the Department
 of Technology in the solicitation.

(4) The Director of General Services or the Director of Technology, as appropriate under paragraphs (2) and (3), shall issue a decision within a period not to exceed 45 days from the date the protest is filed.

(5) Arbitration, as defined and established by the Department of General Services, shall be the resolution tool.

(d) Authority to protest under this chapter shall be limited to participating bidders.

(1) Grounds for major information technology acquisition protests shall be limited to violations of the solicitation procedures and that the protestant should have been selected.

(2) Any other acquisition protest filed pursuant to this chapter shall be
 based on the ground that the bid or proposal should have been selected in accordance with selection criteria in the solicitation document.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 72.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12127.

Major information technology acquisitions subject to this chapter shall meet the following criteria:

(a) The agency or department has stated its business needs and not detailed specification in the solicitation.

(b) The agency or department has stated the criteria and the weight to be given to each criterion by which it will evaluate all proposals.

(c) The contract shall be awarded based on “value effective acquisition,” as that term is defined in Section 12100.7, competitive negotiation, an alternative procurement, or performance-based solicitations.

(History: Added by Stats. 1997, Ch. 762, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

12127.5.

All other procurements subject to this chapter shall meet one or more of the following criteria:

(a) The agency or department has stated its business needs and not detailed specification in the solicitation.

(b) The agency or department has stated the criteria and the weight to be given to each criterion by which it will evaluate all proposals.

(c) The contract shall be awarded based on “value effective acquisition,” as that term is defined in Section 12100.7, competitive negotiation, an alternative procurement, performance-based solicitations, or other methodologies as established by the Department of General Services.

(History: Added by Stats. 1997, Ch. 762, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

12128.

The Department of General Services and the Department of Technology in accordance with Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 12100) of Part 2 of Division 2 and this chapter shall apply this chapter to the following categories:

(a) Information technology and ancillary services.

(b) Material, supplies, equipment, and ancillary services.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 28, Sec. 73.   (SB 71)   Effective June 27, 2013.   Operative July 1, 2013, by Sec. 93 of Ch. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

12129.

The Department of General Services shall electronically submit a report and recommendations to the Legislature regarding the Alternative Protest Process on or before January 1, 2007, and on or before January 1, 2010. The report shall include the following:

(a) The percentage of bids with values under five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), under one million dollars ($1,000,000), and over one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more that were not subject to the Alternative Protest Process that were protested.

(b) The percentage of bids with values under five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), under one million dollars ($1,000,000), and over one million dollars ($1,000,000) that were subject to the Alternative Protest Process that were protested.

(c) The number of protests determined to be frivolous by the Department of General Services, subject to this chapter, with corresponding data for solicitations issued pursuant to existing procedures.

(d) The percentage of contracts awarded under the Alternative Protest Process that were subsequently challenged in a court of law with corresponding data for solicitations issued pursuant to existing procedures.

(e) The length of time to resolve protests pursuant to this chapter and the corresponding data for solicitations issued pursuant to existing procedures.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 272, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3.7. Prohibition of the Offshoring of State Public Benefits Contracts [12140. - 12140.]

12140.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, any state agency authorized to enter into contracts relating to public benefit programs shall only contract for services provided by a call center that directly serves applicants for, recipients of, or enrollees in, those public benefit programs with a contractor that certifies in its bid for the contract that the services provided under the contract and any subcontract performed under that contract, to applicants for, recipients of, or enrollees in, those public benefit programs, will be performed solely with workers employed in California. Any contractor that knowingly provides false information in the certification required by this subdivision shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000), in addition to any other remedies available to the state
 agency. An action for a civil penalty under this subdivision may be brought by any public prosecutor in the name of the people of the State of California.

(b) For purposes of this section:

(1) “Call center” means a building, facility, or operation where customer or client services or assistance is provided by telephone, fax, email, text, or web-based interaction.

(2) “Public benefit programs” means California Work Opportunity and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs), CalFresh, Medi-Cal, Healthy Families, and the California Healthcare Eligibility, Enrollment, and Retention System.

(c) (1) The contract shall provide that in the event a contractor or subcontractor performs the contract or the subcontract for call center services with
 workers not employed in California during the life of the contract, the state has the right to terminate the contract for noncompliance and the contractor or subcontractor shall pay a penalty to the state agency in an amount equal to the amount paid by the state agency for the percentage of work that was performed with workers not employed in California.

(2) The penalty authorized in paragraph (1) shall be in addition to any other applicable penalty, including, but not limited to, the penalty provided in subdivision (a).

(d) (1) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a state agency may conduct a solicitation without applying this section if the California Health and Human Services Agency or the board of the California Health Benefit Exchange makes any of the following determinations:

(A) A prior
 solicitation was conducted and the bids received were priced unreasonably high as a result of including these provisions.

(B) A prior solicitation was conducted and fewer than two bids were received as a result of including these provisions.

(C) The services are needed in cases of emergency where immediate acquisition is necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare or safety.

(2) If the agency or board makes a determination described in paragraph (1), that entity shall submit a report to the Assembly Committee on Jobs, Economic Development and the Economy and to the Senate Committee on Labor and Industrial Relations on or before the last day of the quarter following the quarter in which the determination was made. The report shall include the reason for making the determination.

(e) This section shall not apply to the following:

(1) A contract or subcontract, if implementation would violate the specific terms of the Agreement on Government Procurement of the World Trade Organization or any other bilateral or regional free trade agreement to which the State of California has consented.

(2) A contract or subcontract, including extensions of that contract or subcontract, that results from a request for proposal or bid that occurred prior to the effective date of the act that adds this chapter.

(3) A contract for a public benefit program between a state agency and a health care service plan or a specialized health care service plan regulated by the Department of Managed Health Care, and any subcontract performed under that contract,
 or a disability insurer or specialized health insurer regulated by the Department of Insurance, and any subcontract performed under that contract.

(f) This section shall be construed so as to not conflict with, and be applied consistent with, federal law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 67, Sec. 162.   (AB 1170)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3.9. Offshoring University of California and California State University Contracts [12147. - 12147.]

12147.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, on or after July 1, 2017, neither the University of California nor the California State University may contract for services with a contractor or subcontractor unless that contractor or subcontractor
 does either of the following:

 (A) Certifies, under penalty of perjury, in his or her bid for that contract that the contract, and any subcontract performed under that contract, will be performed solely with workers within the United States.

(B) Describes in his or her bid any
 parts of the work that will be performed by workers outside of the United States.

(2) If the University of California or the California State University enters into a services contract with a contractor whose bid indicates that specific work will be performed by workers outside of the United States, the University of California or the California State University, as appropriate, shall not, for the duration of that contract, displace an employee performing that specific work.

(b) Notwithstanding any other law, neither the University of California nor the California State University may expend funds to train service contract employees located in foreign
 countries or train service contract employees who plan to relocate to a foreign country as part of the service contract, if that service contract displaces an employee of the University of California or the California State University.

(c) A contract entered into pursuant to subdivision (a) shall provide that, in the event a contractor or subcontractor performs the contract or the subcontract with workers outside the United States during the life of the
 contract and the contractor or subcontractor does not describe this work in his or her bid as referenced in subdivision (a), the contract shall be terminated for noncompliance, and the contractor or subcontractor shall forfeit penalties to the University of California or the California State University, as appropriate, in an amount equal to the amount paid by the university for the percentage of work that was performed with workers outside the United States.

(d) (1) A contractor shall be found to have violated subdivision (a) only to the extent that he or she fails to note in
 a bid any work to be accomplished by workers outside of the United States. The University of California or the California State University shall be found to have violated subdivision (a) only to the extent that the University of California or the California State University displaces an employee performing that specific work after having been notified in the contractor’s bid that the specific work would be performed by workers outside of the United States.

(2) For purposes of this section, “displace” means the layoff, demotion, involuntary transfer to a new classification, involuntary transfer to a new location, or time base reduction of an
 employee, during the operation of a contract that is subject to this chapter, where the employee is performing the specific work that a contractor has identified as to be performed by workers outside of the United States and the reason for the layoff, demotion, involuntary transfer to a new classification, or time base reduction of the employee is a direct result of the University of California or the California State University entering into the contract that is subject to this chapter.

(3) Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), nothing in this section shall preclude the University of California and the California State University from contracting with a contractor or subcontractor that utilizes workers in offshore operations in circumstances that do not directly result in the displacement of an employee of the University of California or the California State University.

(e) This chapter does not apply to a contract if refusing to award that contract, on the basis that the contractor or subcontractor does not certify under penalty of perjury that the contract, and any subcontract performed under that
 contract, will be performed solely with workers within the United States, would violate the specific terms of the Agreement on Government Procurement of the World Trade Organization or any other bilateral or regional free trade agreement that California has consented to.

(f) This chapter does not apply to either of the following:

(1) Contracts relating to study abroad programs conducted by the University of California or the California State University.

(2) Contracts relating to international teaching, research, or public service activities and projects conducted by the University of California or the California State University.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 844, Sec. 2.   (AB 848)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4. State Agency Buy Recycled Campaign [12153. - 12217.]



  ARTICLE 1. General Provisions [12153. - 12156.]

12153.

The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(a) It is the policy of the state to conserve and protect resources for future citizens as well as the current population of the state.

(b) It is in the best interest of the people of the state that the state alter its perception of solid waste to instead look upon this waste as resources that can be recovered and reused.

(c) It is in the best interest of reducing the increasing burden on communities disposing of the state’s solid waste for the state to take a role in developing an integrated state solid waste management policy, which includes source reduction, recycling, composting, market development, incineration, and landfills. Since recycling is a necessary component of this policy, the state shall encourage the use of recycled products to ensure that the state’s industries have sufficient and adequate markets for products regeneratively utilizing the state’s solid waste as recycled resources.

(d) It is the policy of the state to encourage the expansion of businesses located in California and, to whatever extent possible, to look favorably on California businesses in the recycling industry, which include, but are not limited to, those California businesses that manufacture, distribute, or act as brokers for, recycled products.

(e) Market development is the key to moving beyond the uneven collection of recyclable materials to stable resource recovery and reuse. Because of existing local collection programs, significant quantities of recycled resources such as the following are today available for purchase: fine grades of paper, high-quality paper products, plastics, retreaded automobile tires, rerefined lubricating oil, reused automotive parts, reclaimed solvents, recycled asphalt, recycled concrete, carpet or geotextiles composed of recycled plastics, compost and co-compost products, and steel products.

(f) In making these findings, the Legislature declares that the policy and intent of this chapter is to set an example for the state and nation to encourage the purchase of products utilizing recycled resources.

(g) It is the intent of the Legislature, whenever economically feasible and as markets allow, to continually expand the policies of the state to utilize recycled resources in the daily operations of the state. This includes, but is not limited to, the procurement and purchase of recycled materials, the use of recycled resources in the performance of a service or project for the state, and the purchase of equipment used for the collection and sale of waste materials generated by the state.

(h) It is the intent of the Legislature that the Department of General Services work with all state departments, agencies, the Legislature, the California Integrated Waste Management Board, and the Department of Conservation to draft, establish, and implement policies that ensure the procurement and use of recycled resources.

(i) It is also the intent of the Legislature to encourage local public agencies and private companies to adopt policies to maximize the use of recycled resources.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 427, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

12156.

(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), no state agency shall purchase any printer or duplication cartridge for which the manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retailer, or remanufacturer places restrictions on the recycling or remanufacturing of that cartridge by any other person. For purposes of this section, these restrictions include, but are not limited to, all of the following:

(1) Reducing the price of the cartridge in exchange for any agreement not to remanufacture the cartridge.

(2) A licensing agreement on the cartridge that forbids remanufacturing.

(3) Any contract that forbids the remanufacturing or recycling of the cartridge.

(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retailer, or remanufacturer who establishes a recycling or remanufacturing program that is available to its customers may enter into signed agreements with those customers consenting to the return of the used cartridge to the manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retailer, or remanufacturer, only for either of the following purposes:

(1) Recycling and remanufacturing, for purposes of making the remanufactured cartridge available for purchase.

(2) Recycling.

(c) Each state agency shall print a statement on the cover of its printer or duplicator cartridge bid packages, or in some other noticeable place in the bid packet, notifying all bidders that it is unlawful to prohibit a printer or duplication cartridge that is sold to the state from being recycled or remanufactured, except as specified in subdivision (b).

(d) This section does not authorize any violation of the Cartwright Act (Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 16700) of Part 2 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code) or the Unfair Practices Act (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 17000) of Part 2 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code).

(e) As used in this section, the following terms mean:

(1) “Printer or duplication cartridge” means a cartridge, including, but not limited to, a toner or ink cartridge, used in printer or duplication equipment for business or personal use.

(2) “Recycled” means a printer or duplication cartridge that would otherwise become solid waste, but which has undergone a process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, or reconstituting, and which has been returned for the manufacture of new products or the remanufacture of used cartridges.

(3) “Remanufactured” means a printer or duplication cartridge that has served its intended end use, but, rather than being discarded or disposed of, has instead been restored, renovated, repaired, or recharged, without substantial alteration of its form.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 910, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Recycled Paper Products [12164.5. - 12167.1.]

12164.5.

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature that for the current state waste paper collection program, the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery shall provide participating locations with public information awareness and training to state and legislative employees. Additionally, the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery
 shall provide training for personnel, including but not limited to, state and buildings and grounds personnel, responsible for the collection of waste materials. This training shall include, but is not limited to, educating and training the personnel concerning the separation and collection of recyclable materials.

(b) It is also the intent of the Legislature that the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery continue the current state waste paper collection program and use this program as a model to develop a plan for other waste materials generated by state and legislative employees.

(c) It is also the intent of the
 Legislature that the department, in consultation with the
 Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, shall submit a new recycling plan, which includes, but is not limited to, the collection and sale of waste materials generated by state and legislative employees. This plan shall be submitted to the appropriate legislative policy committees on or before August 31, 1990. The plan may be phased in utilizing those office facilities and collecting those waste materials most conducive to operation of a source separation program, but shall be fully implemented by June 1, 1991.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 26, Sec. 70.   (SB 92)   Effective June 27, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

12165.

(a) After implementing a recycling plan pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 12164.5, the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery shall establish, implement, and maintain a recycling plan for the Legislature, which may include all legislative offices and individual members’ district offices; all state offices whether in state-owned buildings or leased facilities in Sacramento, Los Angeles, and San Francisco Counties; and in any other areas that the board determines to be feasible. The plan shall include the provisions for the recycling of
 office paper, corrugated cardboard, newsprint, beverage containers (as defined in Section 14503 of the Public Resources Code), waste oil, and any other material at the discretion of the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery.

(b) The collection program for each product and each location shall be reevaluated by the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery on or before January 1, 1994. Subsequently, the
 Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery,
 upon the determination that inclusion of any particular material type would result in a net revenue loss to the state, shall have the discretion to exclude that material from the program, and shall report its conclusions and recommendations to the Legislature. In determining the net revenue loss for the collection of a specified waste material, the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery shall include the avoided cost to dispose of the waste material. The plan shall provide either for the collection and sale of materials to private brokers, recycling plants, or nonprofit organizations, or the operation of these entities by the state, or a combination thereof. The plan shall be implemented at the earliest possible date.

(c) The
 Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery shall provide participating locations with public awareness information and training to state and legislative employees, including, but not limited to, the proper separation and disposal of recyclable resources. Additionally, the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery shall provide training for personnel, including, but not limited to, state buildings and grounds personnel, responsible for the collection of waste materials. This training shall include, but is not limited to, educating and training the personnel concerning the separation and collection of recyclable materials.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 26, Sec. 71.   (SB 92)   Effective June 27, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

12166.

The Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery may contract as necessary for the recycling of products which have been returned pursuant to Section 12165.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 26, Sec. 72.   (SB 92)   Effective June 27, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

12167.1.

Proceeds received from the implementation of the recycling plan established pursuant to Section 12165 or any other activity involving the collection and sale of recyclable materials in state and legislative offices located in state-owned and state-leased buildings, including, but not limited to, the sale of waste materials through recycling programs, shall be utilized to offset program recycling costs.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 26, Sec. 75.   (SB 92)   Effective June 27, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Compost and Co-compost Products [12180. - 12184.]

12180.

The Legislature hereby finds and declares that it is the policy of the state to encourage the use of marketable end products which are produced as a result of superior waste management by counties, cities, and local agencies.

The Legislature further finds and declares that it is in the public interest to provide special consideration for the state purchase of co-compost and compost products because these products substantially reduce the need for solid waste disposal facilities, such as landfills, and will assist the state in providing new alternatives for the alarming decrease in available solid waste disposal facilities, such as landfills.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1094, Sec. 10.)
-------------------------------------------

12183.

(a) All state departments and agencies, including, but not limited to, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Water Resources, the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, and the Department of Parks and Recreation, shall give purchase preference to compost and cocompost products when they can be substituted for, and cost no more than, the cost of regular fertilizer or soil amendment products, or both, if the cocompost products meet all applicable state standards and regulations, as determined by appropriate testing. The product preference shall include, but not be limited to, the construction of noise attenuation barriers and safety walls, highway planting projects, and recultivation and erosion control programs.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 538.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

12184.

It is the intent of the Legislature, in enacting this article, that the revenues derived from the state purchase of co-compost products will be used by counties, cities, and local agencies to offset the costs of construction, operation, and maintenance of co-compost waste disposal facilities.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1094, Sec. 10.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Recycled Materials, Goods, and Supplies [12200. - 12217.]

12200.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “CalRecycle” means the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, as defined pursuant to Section 40110 of the Public Resources Code.

(b) “Business” includes bidders, contractors, and other interested parties that provide services to, or sell products to, the state.

(c) “Department” means the Department of General Services.

(d) “Director” means the Director of General Services.

(e) “Postconsumer material” means a
 finished material that would have been disposed of as a solid waste, having completed its life cycle as a consumer item, and does not include manufacturing wastes.

(f) “Product categories” include paper products, printing and writing papers, soil amendments and soil toppings, erosion control products, glass, lubricating oils, plastic, paint, tires, tire-derived products, antifreeze, metal, carpet, pavement surfacing, building finishes, and textiles.

(g) “Purchase” means any contractual agreement that state agencies use to obtain goods or materials.

(h) “Recycled products” mean goods or materials that meet the requirements identified in Section 12209, including any good or material that has been reused or refurbished without substantial alteration of its original form.

(i) “Reportable purchase” means the purchase of any goods or materials, with recycled content or not, that may be reported or categorized or classified within one of the product categories identified in Section 12207.

(j) “Reportable recycled product purchase” means the purchase of any goods or materials that meet the requirements identified in Section 12209, that may be reported or categorized or classified within one of the product categories identified in Section 12207, including any good or material that has been reused or refurbished without substantial alteration of its original form.

(k) “SABRC” means the State Agency Buy Recycled Campaign.

(l) “Secondary material” means fragments of finished products or finished products of a manufacturing process,
 that has converted a resource into a commodity of real economic value, but does not include excess virgin resources of the manufacturing process, such as fibers recovered from wastewater, trimmings of paper machine rolls, mill broke, plastic, or metal trimmings, or shavings, or other residue from a manufacturing process. Secondary material does not include postconsumer material, so that the secondary material plus the postconsumer material plus the virgin material adds up to 100 percent of the product.

(m) “State agency” means each entity identified in Section 11000 of the Government Code, and includes the California State University.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 3.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12201.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that it is the policy of the state to conserve and protect its resources. The Legislature further finds and declares that the use of recycled products produced as the result of the superior waste management efforts by the state and local governmental entities will help conserve resources and reduce greenhouse gas emissions contributing to global warming pursuant to the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (Division 25.5 (commencing with Section 38500) of the Health and Safety Code).

(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the state pursue all feasible measures to improve markets for recycled products including, but not limited to, education and training of state agency
 purchasers and bid evaluation preferences for purchases made by the state.

(c) A state agency shall purchase recycled products instead of nonrecycled products, if all of the following requirements are met:

(1) Fitness and quality of the products are equal.

(2) Recycled products are available at no more than 10 percent greater total cost than nonrecycled products.

(3) One of the following situations applies:

(A) A state agency uses a leveraged procurement agreement through which both recycled and nonrecycled products are available.

(B) A state agency is awarding a contract using Section 14838.5 of the Government Code and
 receives offers for both recycled and nonrecycled products.

(C) A state agency awards a contract without soliciting multiple offers based on a determination that the price is fair and reasonable.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 4.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12202.

The University of California is not subject to the procurement requirements of this article but shall report, pursuant to Section 12211, on purchases of the products listed in Section 12207 and what percentage of those purchases meet the associated minimum recycled content requirements in Section 12209.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 5.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12203.

Each state agency shall ensure each of the following:

(a) (1) Before January 1, 2020, at least 50 percent of reportable purchases are recycled products.

(2) On and after January 1, 2020, at least 75 percent of reportable purchases are recycled products, except for paint, antifreeze, and tires.

(3) On and after January 1, 2020, at least 50 percent of reportable purchases of paint, antifreeze, and tires are recycled products.

(b) The requirements specified in this article apply to all reportable purchases of goods by state agencies for product categories listed in this
 article.

(c) The reportable purchases of state agencies shall meet each requirement for, and be applied to the total dollar amount of, each specified product category as defined in this article. The purchase of a recycled product from one category may not be applied toward the requirements for, or the total dollar amount of, any other category listed in this article.

(d) Each state agency shall require the businesses with whom it contracts to use, to the maximum extent economically feasible in the performance of the contract work, recycled products.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 6.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12205.

(a) (1) All state agencies shall require all businesses to certify in writing the minimum percentage, if not the exact percentage, of postconsumer material in the products, materials, goods, or supplies offered or sold to the state regardless of whether the product meets the requirements of Section 12209. The certification shall be furnished under penalty of perjury. The certification shall be provided regardless of content, even if the product contains no recycled material.

(2) With respect to printer or duplication cartridges that comply with the requirements of subdivision (e) of Section 12156, the certification required by this subdivision shall specify that the cartridges so comply.

(3) A state agency may waive the certification requirement if the percentage of postconsumer material in the products, materials, goods, or supplies can be verified in a written advertisement, including, but not limited to, a product label, a catalog, or a manufacturer or vendor Internet Web site.

(b) (1) All businesses shall certify in writing to the contracting officer or his or her representative the minimum percentage, if not the exact percentage, of postconsumer material in the products, materials, goods, or supplies being offered or sold to the state regardless of whether the product meets the requirements of Section 12209. The certification shall be furnished under penalty of perjury. The certification shall be provided regardless of content, even if the product contains no recycled material.

(2) With respect to printer or duplication cartridges that comply with the requirements of subdivision (e) of Section 12156, the certification required by this subdivision shall specify that the cartridges so comply.

(3) A state agency may waive the certification requirement if the percentage of postconsumer material in the products, materials, goods, or supplies can be verified in a written advertisement, including, but not limited to, a product label, a catalog, or a manufacturer or vendor Internet Web site.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 590, Sec. 29.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

12207.

This article applies to the purchase of goods and materials from the following product categories:

(a) Paper products, including, but not limited to, paper janitorial supplies, cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, and hanging files, building insulation and panels, corrugated boxes, paper food serviceware, tissue, and toweling.

(b) Printing and writing papers including, but not limited to, copy, xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper, white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets, newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars, brochures, reports, magazines, and
 publications.

(c) Soil amendments and soil toppings.

(d) Erosion control products. 

(e) Glass products including, but not limited to, windows, test tubes, beakers, laboratory or hospital supplies, fiberglass (insulation), reflective beads, tiles, construction blocks, desktop accessories, flat glass sheets, loose-grain abrasives, deburring media, liquid filter media, and containers.

(f) Lubricating oils including, but not limited to, any oil intended for use in a crankcase, transmission, engine, power steering, gearbox, differential chainsaw, transformer dielectric fluid, cutting, hydraulic, industrial, or automobile, bus, truck, vessel, plane, train, heavy equipment, or machinery powered by an internal combustion engine.

(g) (1) Plastic products including, but not limited to, printer or duplication cartridges, diskette, carpet, office products, plastic lumber, buckets, wastebaskets, containers, benches, tables, fencing, clothing, mats, packaging, signs, posts, binders, sheet, buckets, building products, garden hose, plastic food serviceware, and trays.

(2) For purposes of this subdivision, “printer or duplication cartridges” has the same meaning as described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (f) of Section 12209.

(h) Paint, including, but not limited to, water-based paint, graffiti abatement, interior and exterior, and maintenance.

(i) Antifreeze, including recycled antifreeze, and antifreeze containing a bittering agent or made from polypropylene or
 other similar nontoxic substance.

(j) Retread tires, including, but not limited to, truck and bus tires, and those used on fleet vehicles and passenger cars.

(k) Tire-derived products including, but not limited to, flooring, mats, wheelchair ramps, playground surfacing, sports surfacing, parking bumpers, bullet traps, hoses, bumpers, truck bedliners, pads, walkways, tree ties, wheel chocks, rollers, traffic-related products, mudflaps, accessibility ramps, paths and sidewalks, animal care products, including, but not limited to, horse arena surfacing, stall mats, cow mats, and equestrian barn and breezeway flooring, artificial turf, landscaping and rubber mulch, outdoor surfacing, pavers and tiles, and posts.

(l) Metals, including, but not limited to, staplers, paper clips, scissors, jacks, rebar, pipe, plumbing
 fixtures, ladders, file cabinets, shelving, containers, lockers, sheet metal, girders, building and construction products, bridges, braces, nails, and screws.

(m) Building finishes, including, but not limited to, open panel office systems.

(n) Carpet.

(o) Textiles, including, but not limited to, general purpose wipes.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 7.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12209.

(a) (1) CalRecycle, with the concurrence of the department and in consultation with impacted agencies, shall update the list of products identified in this section and update the minimum recycled content percentages, as determined to be appropriate, commencing January 1, 2026, and every three years thereafter. In updating the list of products identified, CalRecycle shall take into consideration the standards in the United States Environmental Protection Agency Comprehensive Procurement Guidelines for Paper and Paper Products. CalRecycle and the department shall incorporate the updated list of products and minimum recycled content requirements into the State Contracting Manual, the Financial Information System for California, and the financial system of any department not utilizing the
 Financial Information System for California. CalRecycle shall maintain an internet website with current SABRC products and minimum recycled content requirements.

(2) In determining whether the minimum recycled content percentages should be updated pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (3), CalRecycle shall consider, at a minimum, all of the following factors:

(A) Market conditions, including supply and demand for the postconsumer recycled materials, collection rates, and bale availability both domestically and globally.

(B) Recycling rates.

(C) The availability of the recycled material suitable to meet the minimum recycled content requirements.

(D) The capacity of recycling or processing
 infrastructure.

(3) CalRecycle, with the concurrence of the department, may set a higher minimum recycled content standard for white 20 pound printing and writing paper and white wove envelopes, either during the triennial review pursuant to paragraph (1) or at any other time after January 1, 2024.

(b) For purposes of this article, effective January 1, 2023, and until updated pursuant to subdivision (a), the product categories and minimum content and recyclability requirements identified in subdivisions (c) to (r), inclusive, shall apply:

(c) (1) Recycled paper products shall consist of at least 30 percent, by fiber weight, of postconsumer recycled content fiber, as specified below. Printing and writing paper shall consist of at least 30 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content
 fiber, provided that printed newspapers that meet the requirements of Chapter 15 (commencing with Section 42750) of Part 3 of Division 30 of the Public Resources Code shall be considered in compliance with the requirements of this section.

(2) Other paper products shall consist of at least 30 percent, by fiber weight, of postconsumer recycled content fiber, except as specified below:

(A) Toilet paper shall consist of at least 45 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content fiber.

(B) Paper towels shall consist of at least 40 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content fiber.

(C) Facial tissue shall consist of at least 10 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content fiber.

(D) Toilet seat covers shall consist of at least 20 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content fiber.

(E) General purpose paper wipers shall consist of at least 40 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content fiber.

(F) Food serviceware, including, but not limited to, napkins, plates, bowls, food trays, takeout boxes, placemats, etc. shall consist of at least 40 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer recycled content fiber.

(d) (1) For recycled soil amendments and soil toppings, at least 80 percent of the product shall consist of compost or mulch materials, or both, that would otherwise be normally disposed of in landfills.

(2) As used in this
 subdivision:

(A) “Compost” means a product that meets the following requirements:

(i) It results from the controlled biological decomposition of organic materials, including, but not limited to, yard trimmings, green materials, food materials, biosolids and wood byproducts that are separated from the municipal solid waste stream at the source of generation or at a centralized facility, or other source of organic materials.

(ii) It is produced by a public or private supplier that is in compliance with CalRecycle’s composting operations regulatory requirements.

(B) “Mulch” means a product that meets the following requirements:

(i) It results from the mechanical breakdown by chipping and
 grinding of materials, including, but not limited to, yard trimmings, untreated lumber, and wood byproducts that are separated from the municipal solid waste stream at the source of generation or at a centralized facility.

(ii) It is produced by a public or private supplier that is in compliance with CalRecycle’s composting operations regulatory requirements.

(iii) It results from the mechanical breakdown by chipping and grinding of dead and dying trees removed to reduce wildfire risk.

(e) (1) For recycled erosion control products, the recycled products shall be derived to the greatest extent possible, from no less than 100 percent California recycled organic materials diverted from the solid waste stream or from forest health management that consists of trees generated from the removal of dead
 and dying trees to reduce wildfire risk, and hydraulic mulch that includes compost made from 100 percent California recycled organic materials or recycled paper, or both, with 100 percent California content, as practicable and feasible.

(2) As used in this subdivision:

(A) “Recycled erosion control products” mean compost filter socks, compost blankets, and other compost-related erosion products:

(i) Compost filter socks are a three-dimensional tubular sediment control and stormwater runoff filtration device consisting of a mesh covering and a filtration medium made of fully composted materials. Compost filter socks come in 5, 8, and 12 inches in diameter. A 5-inch compost filter sock may be considered the functional equivalent of a 12-inch straw wattle.

(ii) A compost blanket is a layer of compost protecting bare soil surfaces with slope less than 1.5:1 from wind and water erosion that provides water conservation, weed control, and nutrients for long-term, sustainable vegetation. The blanket may or may not contain a tackifier or be seeded. The blanket may be spread by hand or using a blower truck.

(B) “Hydraulic mulch” means an erosion control process that uses a fiber slurry and a tackifier. The slurry is transported in a tank, either truck- or trailer-mounted, and sprayed on prepared ground. The slurry may also contain compost and seeds.

(3) When considering the costs of compost-based erosion control measures, state agencies may also consider performance, pollution prevention, and cost of deployment, although when pollutants are present, control of pollutants shall take precedence over cost.

(f) For recycled glass, not including glass food and beverage containers, the total weight shall consist of at least 25 percent postconsumer material, except for fiberglass, which shall consist of 30 percent cullet, consistent with Section 19511 of the Public Resources Code.

(g) Rerefined lubricating oil shall have a base oil content consisting of at least 70 percent rerefined oil.

(h) (1) For recycled plastic products, the total weight shall consist of at least 20 percent postconsumer material.

(2) Recycled printer or duplication cartridges shall be remanufactured such that they adhere to specifications equal to or exceeding original equipment manufacturer (OEM) cartridge specifications and approved remanufactured toner cartridge
 industry standards established by the Standardized Test Methods Committee, or comply with the general requirement for recycled plastic products set forth in paragraph (1). All printer or duplication cartridges shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 12156.

(i) Recycled paint shall have a recycled content consisting of at least 50 percent postconsumer paint. Preconsumer or secondary paint does not qualify as “recycled paint” pursuant to this subdivision.

(j) Recycled antifreeze fluid shall have a recycled content of at least 70 percent postconsumer materials.

(k) Retreaded tires must use an existing casing that has undergone an approved or accepted recapping or retreading process, in accordance with Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 42400) of Part 3 of Division 30 of the Public Resources Code.

(l) For recycled tire-derived products, such as crumb rubber (as a singular, intermediate product), rubber mulch or bark, rubberized sidewalks or tree wells, loose-fill or pour-in-place playgrounds, tiled or rolled recreational flooring, floor and agricultural mats, sports tracks, or synthetic turf infill, the total content shall consist of at least 50 percent recycled used waste tires and the recycled products shall be derived from no less than 100 percent California recycled materials diverted from the solid waste stream.

(m) (1) Rubberized pavement surfaces, such as rubberized asphalt concrete and chip seal, the binder shall contain at least 15 percent recycled waste tires by weight and the recycled products shall be derived from no less than 100 percent California recycled materials diverted from the solid waste stream.

(2) Recycled asphalt pavement shall contain a minimum of 25 percent reclaimed asphalt pavement by weight, as permitted by specifications and standards developed by the Department of Transportation for recycled paving materials pursuant to Sections 42700 and 42701 of the Public Resources Code, to the extent that the use of such materials meets the Department of Transportation’s performance standards and that the use of such materials is practicable and feasible without impacting the lifespan and durability of the pavement containing the materials.

(n) For recycled metal products, the total weight shall consist of at least 10 percent postconsumer material.

(o) For reused or refurbished products, there is no minimum content requirement.

(p) For building
 finishes, open office panel systems shall meet the middle range requirements of department state contracts.

(q) Carpet shall contain a minimum postconsumer recycled content that shall be determined by the department and published in the State Contracting Manual by July 1, 2018, and subsequently updated by the department. The department shall include carpet recycling requirements for state buildings in the State Contracting Manual.

(r) For textiles in general, there is no minimum content requirement. For general purpose textile wipes, the total content shall consist of 100 percent recycled content.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 9.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12211.

(a) A state agency shall report annually to CalRecycle its progress in meeting the recycled product purchasing requirements and, if necessary, an explanation of circumstances beyond the state agency’s control that prevented the state agency from meeting the recycled product purchasing requirements for specified product categories using the SABRC report format provided by CalRecycle.

(b) On or before October 31 of each year, the department shall provide to CalRecycle the following information:

(1) A list, by category, of individual reportable recycled products, materials, goods, and supplies that were available for purchase by state agencies from a statewide-use contract, agreement, or schedule during
 the previous fiscal year.

(2) A list, by category, of all reportable products, materials, goods, and supplies that were available for purchase by state agencies from a statewide-use contract, agreement, or schedule, including contract, agreement, or schedule tracking numbers, during the previous fiscal year.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 10.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12215.

Each state agency may, at the discretion of the individual agency director or their designee, print a statement on recycled products selected by the agency director. This statement shall be determined by the department, in consultation with CalRecycle, and shall be similar to the following: “Contains at least ____ percent postconsumer material.”

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 517, Sec. 11.   (AB 661)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

12217.

(a) State agency procurement and contracting officers, or their designees, from all agencies shall participate in annual mandatory training that is conducted by CalRecycle. The training may be web-based and shall provide a complete review of the benefits of SABRC purchases, how to locate qualifying products, how to report information, and how to explain benefits and requirements to other employees making purchasing decisions.

(b) If a state agency does not meet SABRC purchasing requirements in each product category, CalRecycle shall report the state agency to the department.

(c) In determining purchasing specifications, with
 the exception of any specifications that have been established to preserve the public health and safety, all state purchasing specifications shall be established in a manner that results in the maximum state purchase of recycled products.

(d) (1) If a recycled product, as defined in subdivision (h) of Section 12200, costs more than the same product made with virgin material, the state agency shall, if feasible, purchase fewer of those more costly products or apply the cost savings, if any, gained from buying other recycled products towards the purchase of those more costly products to meet the solid waste diversion goals of Section 41780.

(2) If a recycled product, as defined in subdivision (h) of Section 12200 has special performance requirements necessary
 for the protection of public safety, as defined by the Department of General Services, the state agency may purchase that product made with virgin material. For the purposes of this paragraph, public safety includes, but is not limited to, structural steel coatings, traffic paint applications, and roadway safety devices.

(e) Each state agency shall establish purchasing practices that ensure the purchase of goods and materials that may be recycled or reused. Each state agency shall continue activities for the collection, separation, and recycling of recyclable materials and may appoint a recycling coordinator to assist in implementing this section. Alternatively, a state contract may require that the vendor take back the product for proper management after it has been used. Upon request by a state agency, CalRecycle shall offer advice and
 recommendations regarding products and situations in which a take-back requirement is appropriate.

(f) To assist the state in meeting the requirements of this article, each state agency, and the department, in consultation with CalRecycle, may also establish recycled product-only bids, cooperative purchasing arrangements, or other mechanisms to meet the requirements for recycled products and to encourage the maximum state purchase of recycled products.

(g) The department, in consultation with CalRecycle, shall review and revise the purchasing specifications and contract documents used by state agencies in order to eliminate restrictive specifications and discrimination against the purchase of remanufactured or recycled products and to ensure that they are drafted in a manner
 that results in the maximum state purchase of remanufactured recycled products. All contract provisions impeding the consideration of recycled products shall be deleted in favor of performance standards. Remanufactured products shall conform to performance standards to ensure they are essentially equivalent to new products that perform the same function.

(h) (1) In order for state agencies to easily procure SABRC-compliant products, ensure their success in the program, and support the recycled content industry, the department and the
 California Correctional Training and Rehabilitation Authority shall prioritize the use of recycled content products.

(2) The department shall continue to make products that meet the SABRC postconsumer minimum percentage requirements available through statewide contracts, and provide information to state agencies regarding contracted products that meet these requirements.

(3) The California Correctional Training and Rehabilitation Authority, in collaboration with CalRecycle, shall make every attempt to procure parts that meet the SABRC postconsumer minimum percentage requirements for the products it creates and sells to state agencies.

(i) Any state agency that is required to submit an SABRC report to
 CalRecycle, pursuant to Section 12211, is subject to a review conducted by CalRecycle or its designee.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 241, Sec. 66.   (SB 857)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 5. Recycled Product Procurement by the Legislature [12300. - 12320.]



  ARTICLE 1. General Provisions [12300. - 12306.]

12300.

Unless otherwise provided, this chapter shall apply to all purchases made on behalf of the Legislature, whether made by the Senate Committee on Rules, the Assembly Committee on Rules, the Joint Rules Committee, or any other agency of the Legislature.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1094, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

12301.

The following definitions govern the interpretation of this chapter:

(a) “Department” means the Department of General Services.

(b) “Board” means the California Integrated Waste Management Board, as defined pursuant to Section 40110 of the Public Resources Code.

(c) “Recycled paper product” means all paper and woodpulp products containing postconsumer and secondary materials. “Postconsumer material” means a finished material that would normally be disposed of as a solid waste, having completed its life cycle as a consumer item. “Secondary material” means fragments of finished products or finished products of a manufacturing process, which has converted a virgin resource into a commodity of real economic value, and includes postconsumer material, but does not include fibrous waste generated during the manufacturing process such as fibers recovered from wastewater or trimmings of paper machine rolls (mill broke), wood slabs, chips, sawdust, or other wood residue from a manufacturing process. “Recycled paper product” means a paper product with not less than 50 percent, by fiber weight, consisting of secondary and postconsumer material with not less than 10 percent of fiber weight consisting of postconsumer material.

For high speed copier paper, offset paper, forms bond, computer printout paper, carbonless paper, file folders, white wove envelopes, and for other uncoated printing and writing papers, such as writing and office paper, book paper, cotton fiber paper containing 25 to 75 percent cotton fiber, and cover stock, the minimum content standard shall be no less than 20 percent of fiber weight of postconsumer materials beginning December 31, 1994. The minimum content standard shall be increased to 30 percent of fiber weight of postconsumer materials beginning on December 31, 1998.

(d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), “recycled product” means all materials, goods, and supplies, excluding paper products, no less than 50 percent of the total weight of which consists of secondary and postconsumer material with not less than 10 percent of its total weight consisting of postconsumer material. A recycled product shall include any product that could have been disposed of as solid waste having completed its life cycle as a consumer item, but otherwise is refurbished for reuse without substantial alteration of its form. “Postconsumer material” means a finished material that would have been disposed of as a solid waste, having completed its life cycle as a consumer item, and does not include manufacturing wastes. “Secondary material” means fragments of finished products or finished products of a manufacturing process, which has converted a resource into a commodity of real economic value, and includes postconsumer material, but does not include excess virgin resources of the manufacturing process.

(2) “Recycled product” also means other flat rolled steel products no less than 25 percent of the total weight of which consists of secondary and postconsumer material, with not less than 10 percent of total weight consisting of postconsumer material. Products made with flat rolled steel meeting these content percentages include, but are not limited to, automobiles, cans, appliances, and office furniture and supplies.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1996, Ch. 319, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1997.)
-------------------------------------------

12305.

This chapter applies to the procurement and purchase of the following materials, goods, and supplies, or products containing the following recycled resources, and meeting the specified content requirements pursuant to either subdivision (c) or (d) of Section 12301, whichever is applicable:

(a) Paper products, that include, but are not limited to, fine grades of paper, corrugated boxes, newsprint, tissue, and toweling.

(b) Glass.

(c) Oil.

(d) Plastic.

(e) Solvents and paint, including water-based paint.

(f) Tires.

(g) Steel.

(h) Antifreeze.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 363, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

12305.5.

If a recycled product costs more than the same product made with virgin material, the Legislature shall purchase fewer of those more costly products or apply cost savings, if any, gained from buying other recycled products towards the purchase of those more costly products.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1999, Ch. 816, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

12306.

This chapter does not apply to the procurement and purchase of asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete pavement.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 1094, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Recycled Paper Products [12310. - 12310.]

12310.

(a) On and after January 1, 1997, at least 50 percent of the total dollar amount of paper products purchased or procured by the Legislature shall be purchased as a recycled paper product, as defined in Section 12301. In addition, at least 25 percent of the total fine writing and printing paper purchased by the Legislature shall be recycled paper products, as defined in Section 12301.

If at any time the requirement for recycled products has not been met, the Legislature and the department, in consultation with the board, shall review the procurement policies of the Legislature and shall make recommendations for immediate revisions to ensure that each requirement is met. Revisions include, but are not limited to, raising the purchasing preference and altering the requirements for each or all recycled products. The department, in consultation with the board, shall present its conclusions and recommendations on these revisions of procurement policies to the Legislature in the department’s biennial report pursuant to Section 12225.

(b) When contracting with the Legislature for the sale of recycled paper products, the contractor shall certify in writing to the contracting officer or his or her representative, that the recycled paper products offered contain the minimum percentage of waste materials required by subdivision (c) of Section 12301. The contractor shall specify the minimum, if not the exact, percentage of recycled product in the paper product, including both the secondary and postconsumer material content. This certification shall be furnished under penalty of perjury.

(c) The Legislature may, in consultation with the board, print a symbol on paper products selected by the Legislature. The symbol shall be similar to the following:

Printed on recycled paper. This symbol shall be printed only on paper products meeting the definition of recycled paper products in Section 12301.

(d) This section shall not prevent the Legislature from using existing stocks of paper products.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1999, Ch. 816, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Recycled Materials, Goods, and Supplies [12320. - 12320.]

12320.

(a) The Legislature shall require contractors to certify in writing to the contracting officer, or his or her representative, whether the materials, goods, or supplies offered contain the minimum percentage of recycled product required by subdivision (d) of Section 12301. The contractor shall specify the minimum, if not exact, percentage of recycled product in the product, both the secondary and postconsumer material content. This certification shall be furnished under penalty of perjury.

(b) The Legislature, in consultation with the department and the board, shall review and revise the procurement specifications used by the Legislature in order to eliminate discrimination against the procurement or purchase of recycled products whenever quality of a recycled product is reasonably equal to the same product manufactured with virgin resources. In determining procurement specifications, with the exception of any specifications that have been established to preserve the public health and safety, all legislative procurement and purchasing specifications shall be established in a manner that results in the maximum legislative procurement and purchase of recycled products.

(c) The Legislature, in consultation with the board, shall establish purchasing practices that ensure, to the maximum extent feasible, the purchase of materials, goods, and supplies that may be recycled or reused when discarded.

(d) The Legislature shall give purchase preference to recycled products when all of the following apply:

(1) The product meets applicable standards.

(2) The product can be substituted for a comparable nonrecycled product.

(3) The product costs no more than a comparable nonrecycled product.

(e) To encourage the use of postconsumer waste, the Legislature’s specifications shall require recycled product contracts to be awarded to the bidder whose product contains the greater percentage of postconsumer material if the fitness and quality and price meet the requirements in subdivision (d) of Section 12301 and Section 12310.

(f) The Legislature shall set the following goals for purchases made by the Legislature or any individual or group of individuals purchasing on behalf of the Legislature:

(1) By January 1, 1991, at least 10 percent of legislative purchases are of recycled products.

(2) By January 1, 1993, at least 20 percent of legislative purchases are of recycled products.

(3) By January 1, 1995, at least 40 percent of legislative purchases are of recycled products.

(4) The goals specified in this subdivision shall be applied to the purchase by the Legislature of products described in subdivisions (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of Section 12305 and shall be applied to the total dollar amount of the combined purchases of those products.

Each specified goal shall be met for each product listed pursuant to Section 12305. If at any time a goal has not been met, the Legislature and the department, in consultation with the board, shall review procurement policies of the Legislature and shall make recommendations for immediate revisions to ensure that each goal is met. Revisions include, but are not limited to, raising the purchasing preference and altering the goals for all or each recycled product. The department, in consultation with the board, shall present its conclusions and recommendations on these revisions of procurement policies to the Legislature in the department’s annual report pursuant to Section 12225.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 427, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 6. Environmentally Preferable Purchasing [12400. - 12404.]

12400.

For purposes of this chapter, “environmentally preferable purchasing” means the procurement or acquisition of goods and services that have a lesser or reduced effect on human health and the environment when compared with competing goods or services that serve the same purpose. This comparison shall take into consideration, to the extent feasible, raw materials acquisition, production, manufacturing, packaging, distribution, reuse, operation, maintenance, disposal, energy efficiency, product performance, durability, safety, the needs of the purchaser, and cost.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 575, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

12401.

The Department of General Services, in consultation with the California Environmental Protection Agency, members of the public, industry, and public health and environmental organizations, shall provide state agencies with information and assistance regarding environmentally preferable purchasing including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) The promotion of environmentally preferable purchasing.

(b) The development and implementation of a strategy to increase environmentally preferable purchasing. This may include the development of statewide policies, guidelines, programs, and regulations.

(c) The coordination with other state and federal agencies, task forces, workgroups, regulatory efforts, research and data collection efforts, and other programs and services relating to environmentally preferable purchasing.

(d) The development and implementation, to the extent fiscally feasible, of training programs designed to instill the importance and value of environmentally preferable purchasing.

(e) The development, to the extent fiscally feasible, of an environmentally preferable purchasing best practices manual for state purchasing employees.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 575, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

12401.5.

Within existing resources, the Department of General Services shall designate a single point of contact for state agencies, suppliers, and other interested parties to contact regarding environmentally preferable purchasing issues.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 575, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

12402.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit, limit, or supersede recycled content requirements pursuant to any other provision of law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 575, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

12403.

Nothing contained in any policy regarding environmentally preferable purchasing may be construed as requiring the acquisition of goods or services that do not perform adequately for their intended use, exclude adequate competition, or are not available at a reasonable price in a reasonable period of time.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 575, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

12404.

Manufacturers, vendors, or other nongovernmental entities contracting with the Department of General Services shall certify in writing that any environmental attribute claims they make concerning their products and services are consistent with the Federal Trade Commission’s Guidelines for the Use of Environmental Marketing Terms.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 575, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 7. The Federal Laboratory Contracting Act [12500. - 12502.]

12500.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Federal Laboratory Contracting Act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 256, Sec. 1.   Effective September 14, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

12501.

The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(a) Technological advances are an important part of California’s economy and, therefore, it would be wise for state agencies to contract, in a facile and efficient manner, with federally funded Department of Energy (DOE) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) research and development centers and NASA field centers located in California that are often at the forefront of science and technology.

(b) As the major funding agency and owner of several research and development centers located in California, DOE allows outside parties to contract with the centers but requires the centers, when initiating and finalizing any contracts with outside parties, to adhere to rigorous policies and procedures specified by federal laws and regulations. NASA adheres to similar federal laws and regulations when initiating and finalizing contracts between its research and development centers or field centers in California and outside parties. The State of California has its own laws, regulations, and procedures governing state contracts. The research and development centers and field centers owned or owned and operated by DOE and NASA have attempted to contract with state agencies and departments in California but have had minimal success. Conflicting provisions in federal and state laws, regulations, and policies, and seemingly unachievable compromises appear to be the major limiting factors in the successful negotiation of contracts between the federally funded centers and California state agencies and departments.

(History: Added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 256, Sec. 1.   Effective September 14, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

12501.5.

(a) The Governor shall designate the Secretary of State and Consumer Services as the state’s representative for purposes of communicating and negotiating with representatives of the United States Department of Energy, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, federally funded DOE and NASA research and development centers in California, and NASA field centers in California regarding any issue that may affect a contractual relationship between the state and these federal entities. The Secretary of State and Consumer Services may delegate this responsibility to the Director of the Department of General Services if the secretary views such delegation as necessary to advance the successful negotiation of contracts between the state and one or more of those federal entities.

(b) The Secretary of State and Consumer Services or his or her designee shall develop policies and procedures to encourage and enable the contracting process with federally funded DOE and NASA research and development centers and NASA field centers and shall develop model contract language that is available for use by any state agency or department in negotiating a contract with one of these centers. The Regents of the University of California shall not be considered a state agency for the purposes of this chapter, and specifically shall not be covered as prime contractor with the DOE for management of DOE laboratories.

(History: Added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 256, Sec. 1.   Effective September 14, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

12502.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency that enters into a prime contract with a federally funded DOE or NASA research and development center or NASA field center, or that enters into a prime contract with another entity that, in turn, issues a subcontract to a federally funded DOE or NASA research and development center or a NASA field center located in California may, if requested by the contracting party, make contract payments to the center for contracted services in advance.

(b) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency that enters into a prime contract with a federally funded DOE or NASA research and development center or NASA field center, or that enters into a prime contract with another entity that, in turn, issues a subcontract to a federally funded DOE or NASA research and development center or NASA field center located in the state may not indemnify the center with respect to products liability, intellectual property, and general liability claims arising out of the activities to be carried out by the center pursuant to the contract.

(c) Notwithstanding any other law, a state agency shall not audit the records of any federally funded DOE or NASA research and development center or NASA field center, but the state agency may rely on the services of any cognizant federal audit agency, including the Defense Contract Audit Agency, the United States Government Accountability Office, the DOE Office of Inspector General, and the NASA Office of Inspector General, to satisfy auditing requirements.

(d) For purposes of this chapter:

(1) “Federally funded research and development center” means a federally funded research and development center as defined in Subpart 2.1 of Part 2 of Subchapter A of Chapter 1 of Title 48 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(2) “NASA field center” means a field center identified as such by NASA and authorized by Title III of the Space Act of 1958.

(History: Added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 256, Sec. 1.   Effective September 14, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 10. Claims and Disputes [19100. - 19102.]

19100.

(a) Presentation of a claim pursuant to Part 3 (commencing with Section 900) of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code is not required to commence a legal action or arbitration proceeding for money or damages on a contract with the state, but any action or proceeding shall be commenced not later than six months after either of the following:

(1) The contracting agency’s final written decision under contract claim provisions.

(2) The accrual of the cause of action, if there are no contract claim provisions.

(b) This section shall not apply to a claim that is subject to the provisions of Section 10240.1.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 438, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

19102.

(a) (1) The second lowest bidder, and any person, firm, association, trust, partnership, labor organization, corporation, or other legal entity which has, prior to the letting of the bids on the public works project in question, entered into a contract with the second lowest bidder, may bring an action in superior court if that entity suffers damages as a result of the bid of the second lowest bidder for any contract subject to this part not being accepted due to the successful bidder’s violation, as evidenced by the conviction of the successful bidder therefor, of any provision of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or of both. 

(2) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a successful bidder who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or of both, was awarded the bid because that successful bidder was able to lower the bid due to this violation or these violations occurring on the contract for public work awarded by the public agency. 

(b) In an action brought pursuant to this section, the court may award costs and reasonable attorney’s fees, in an amount to be determined in the court’s discretion, to the prevailing party. 

(c) For purposes of an action brought pursuant to this section: 

(1) Employee status shall be determined pursuant to Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code with respect to alleged violations of that division, pursuant to the Unemployment Insurance Code with respect to alleged violations of that code, or pursuant to Section 2750. 5 of the Labor Code with respect to alleged violations of either Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or of both. 

(2) “Second lowest bidder” means the second lowest qualified bidder deemed responsive by the public agency awarding the contract for public work. 

(3) The “second lowest bidder” and the “successful bidder” may include any person, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity. 

(d) A second lowest bidder who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or both, within one year prior to filing the bid for public work, and who has failed to take affirmative steps to correct that violation or those violations, is prohibited from taking any action authorized by this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 1991, Ch. 906, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 11. Exemptions [19150. - 19150.]

19150.

Any contract related to the 2020 United States Census and entered into by the Government Operations Agency or the Office of Planning and Research is exempt from this part.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 455, Sec. 4.   (SB 877)   Effective September 17, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------



PART 2.5. CONTRACTING BY JUDICIAL BRANCH ENTITIES [19201. - 19210.]

19201.

This part may be cited as the California Judicial Branch Contract Law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19202.

The Legislature finds and declares that placing all public contract provisions for judicial branch entities in one part will make that law clearer and easier to find. Further, it is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this part to achieve the objectives as set forth in Sections 100, 101, and 102.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19203.

This part shall apply to all contracts initially entered into or amended by judicial branch entities on or after October 1, 2011.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19204.

(a) All judicial branch entities shall comply with the provisions of this code that are applicable to state agencies and departments related to the procurement of goods and services, including information technology goods and services. All contracts with total cost estimated at more than one million dollars ($1,000,000), except contracts covered by Section 68511.9 of the Government Code, shall be subject to the review and recommendations of the Bureau of State Audits to ensure compliance with this part. All judicial branch entities shall notify the State Auditor, in writing, of the existence of any such contracts within 10 business days of entering the contract. In addition, all administrative and infrastructure information technology projects of the Judicial Council or the courts with
 total costs estimated at more than five million dollars ($5,000,000) shall be subject to the reviews and recommendations of the California Technology Agency, as specified in Section 68511.9 of the Government Code.

(b) Except as provided in subdivision (c), procurement and contracting for the planning, design, construction, rehabilitation, renovation, replacement, lease, or acquisition of court facilities shall be conducted by judicial branch entities consistent with the relevant provisions of this code applicable to state agencies.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this part does not apply to procurement and contracting by judicial branch entities that are related to trial court construction, including, but not limited to, the planning, design, construction, rehabilitation, renovation, replacement, lease, or acquisition of trial court facilities. However, this part
 shall apply to contracts for maintenance of all judicial branch facilities that are not under the operation and management of the Department of General Services.

(d) Only until the Judicial Council adopts the Judicial Branch Contracting Manual required pursuant to Section 19206, judicial branch entities shall instead be governed by applicable policies and procedures in the State Administrative Manual and the State Contracting Manual, or policies and procedures as otherwise required by law to be adopted by the Department of General Services applicable to state agencies.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 36, Sec. 71.   (SB 92)   Effective June 30, 2011.   Operative July 27, 2011, pursuant to Sec. 83 of Ch. 36, as amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 136, Sec. 32.)
-------------------------------------------

19205.

(a) As used in this part, “judicial branch entity” means any superior court, court of appeal, the California Supreme Court, the Judicial Council, the Habeas Corpus Resource Center, or the Administrative Office of the Courts.

(b) Where there is a reference in this code to an officer or employee of a state agency, for purposes of this part, these terms shall refer to a member, judicial officer, officer,
 employee, or other person of a judicial branch entity, as applicable.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19206.

The Judicial Council shall adopt and publish no later than January 1, 2012, a Judicial Branch Contracting Manual incorporating procurement and contracting policies and procedures that must be followed by all judicial branch entities subject to this part. The policies and procedures shall include a requirement that each judicial branch entity shall adopt a local contracting manual for procurement and contracting for goods or services by that judicial branch entity. The policies and
 procedures in the manuals shall be consistent with this code and substantially similar to the provisions contained in the State Administrative Manual and the State Contracting Manual.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19207.

Except as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 19204 or as otherwise specifically required by law applicable to any judicial branch entity, nothing in this part is intended, nor shall it be construed, to require the approval, review, or involvement of any other state entity, including, but not limited to, the Department of General Services or the Secretary of California Technology, in the procurement of any judicial branch goods or services, including information technology goods or
 services.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19208.

Nothing in this part is intended, nor shall it be construed to permit, the application of provisions of this code that do not apply to state agencies and departments.

(History: Added by Stats. 2011, Ch. 10, Sec. 21.   (SB 78)   Effective March 24, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

19209.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, the Judicial Council shall annually provide a report to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee and the State Auditor that provides information related to contracts and payments for the trial courts pursuant to subdivisions (b) and (c). The report shall be provided no later than September 30 of each year, covering the state fiscal year ending June 30 of that year. Additionally, judicial branch entities using the Financial Information System for California (FISCal) shall participate with the state’s transparency effort by making their contract and payment information available for the state’s transparency websites on a rolling basis. For these entities, the judicial branch shall ensure their
 contract and payment information is entered in FISCal for the state transparency websites and for state department audit purposes.

(b) For the trial courts, payment data shall include a list of all vendors or contractors receiving payments during the reporting period. For each vendor or contractor receiving any payment during the reporting period, the report shall identify the amount of payment to the contractor or vendor, the type of service or good provided, and the judicial branch entity or entities with which the vendor or contractor was contracted to provide that service or good.

(c) For the trial courts, the report shall include all contracts and contract amendments made during the report period. The report shall identify the vendor or contractor, the type of
 service or good provided under the contract, and, if applicable, the nature of the amendment, the duration of the amendment, and the cost of the amendment.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 36, Sec. 44.   (AB 3364)   Effective January 1, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

19210.

(a) The California State Auditor shall do all of the following:

(1) On or before March 15, 2014, biennially thereafter, and every three years beginning in calendar year 2025, identify five judicial branch entities, excluding the Administrative Office of the Courts, for audit to assess the implementation of this part by the judicial branch entity based upon risk factors that include, but are not limited to, all of the following:

(A) Significant changes in legal or other requirements that have occurred that impact compliance with this part.

(B) The amount of
 time since the last audit performed of the identified judicial branch entity to assess its implementation and compliance with this part.

(C) Previous audit results or known deficiencies.

(D) Significant or unusual changes in management or high employee turnover.

(E) The complexity and size of the judicial branch entity.

(F) The level of sophistication and complexity of existing contracting practices and procedures.

(G) The total volume and type of procurement made by the judicial branch entity compared with overall judicial branch procurement.

(H) Substantial changes in total procurements, including, but not limited to, number and allotted amount, from one year to the next.

(2) On or before March 15 of the year in which the judicial branch entities are identified pursuant to paragraph (1), notify the Joint Legislative Budget Committee and the Joint Legislative Audit Committee of the five judicial branch entities identified and the estimated cost to conduct an audit of each judicial branch entity.

(3) On or before July 1 of the year in which the judicial branch entities are identified, commence an audit of each identified judicial branch entity, subject to an appropriation for this audit whereby moneys are allocated in the annual Budget Act to one or more funds that are available for use by judicial branch
 entities. Upon completion of the final audit report, as identified in paragraph (4), the Administrative Office of the Courts shall reimburse the California State Auditor for the actual costs of the work performed.

(4) Provide the judicial branch entity with a reasonable opportunity to respond to the findings of the audit. An audit report shall not be considered final until this opportunity is provided and any response is included or incorporated into the audit report.

(5) On or before January 15 of the fiscal year for which the appropriation for the audit was made, report the judicial branch entity audit findings, including any response by the judicial branch entity, to the judicial branch entity, the Legislature, the Judicial
 Council, and the Department of Finance.

(6) Annually provide updates to the Legislature on the status of the judicial branch entity implementation of an audit recommendation.

(b) If, on or before March 15 of the year in which the judicial branch entities are identified pursuant to subdivision (a), the California State Auditor identifies, on the basis of the risk factors described in subdivision (a), judicial branch entities for audit in addition to the five identified pursuant to subdivision (a) and notifies the Joint Legislative Budget Committee and the Joint Legislative Audit Committee of these additional entities, along with the estimated cost of each audit, and an appropriation is made for this purpose in the same manner as described in paragraph (3) of
 subdivision (a), the California State Auditor shall then audit the additional judicial branch entities and provide a final audit report as described in paragraphs (4) and (5) of subdivision (a).

(c) On or before July 1, 2015, biennially thereafter, and every three years beginning in calendar year 2025, the California State Auditor shall commence an audit of the Administrative Office of the Courts, to assess the implementation of, and compliance with, this part, subject to an appropriation by the Legislature to the Judicial Council for transfer to the State Audit Fund for this purpose, and provide a final audit report in the manner described in paragraphs (4) and (5) of subdivision (a).

(d) The California State Auditor may follow up on a prior audit finding at any time.

(e) The California State Auditor shall conduct an audit pursuant to this section in accordance with Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 8543) of Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code. Pursuant to Section 8546.2 of the Government Code, the California State Auditor shall request updates from an audited judicial branch entity regarding its progress in implementing audit recommendations made pursuant to this section. The audited judicial branch entity shall provide these updates at intervals prescribed by the California State Auditor so that the California State Auditor may conduct appropriate followup activities.

(f) Moneys that have been transferred to the State Audit Fund pursuant to this section to audit a specific judicial branch entity, but have not been expended by the
 California State Auditor at the time the California State Auditor provides its final audit report for that judicial branch entity, shall revert back to the fund from which the moneys were transferred.

(g) A report submitted pursuant to this section shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(h) If the California State Auditor is selected as the auditing entity pursuant to subdivision (j) of Section 77206 of the Government Code, then the California State Auditor may combine the results of an audit of a trial court conducted pursuant to that section with an audit of the same trial court conducted pursuant to this section. The California State Auditor may also combine the results of an audit of the Administrative Office of the Courts pursuant to
 Section 77206 of the Government Code with the results of an audit of the Administrative Office of the Courts pursuant to this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 837, Sec. 2.   (AB 2628)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------



PART 3. CONTRACTING BY LOCAL AGENCIES [20100. - 22199.6.]



  CHAPTER 1. Local Agency Public Construction Act [20100. - 20929.]



  ARTICLE 1. Title [20100. - 20103.7.]

20100.

This chapter may be cited as the Local Agency Public Construction Act.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20101.

(a) Except as provided in Section 20111.5, a public entity subject to this part may require that each prospective bidder for a contract complete and submit to the entity a standardized questionnaire and financial statement in a form specified by the entity, including a complete statement of the prospective bidder’s experience in performing public works. The standardized questionnaire may not require prospective bidders to disclose any violations of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code committed prior to January 1, 1998, if a violation was based on a subcontractor’s failure to comply with these provisions and the bidder had no knowledge of the subcontractor’s
 violations. The Department of Industrial Relations, in collaboration with affected agencies and interested parties, shall develop model guidelines for rating bidders, and draft the standardized questionnaire, that may be used by public entities for the purposes of this part. The Department of Industrial Relations, in developing the standardized questionnaire, shall consult with affected public agencies, cities and counties, the construction industry, the surety industry, and other interested parties. The questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. The questionnaires and financial statements shall not be public records and shall not be open to public inspection; however, records of the names of contractors applying for prequalification status shall be public records subject to disclosure under
 Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(b) Any public entity requiring prospective bidders to complete and submit questionnaires and financial statements, as described in subdivision (a), shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders on the basis of the completed questionnaires and financial statements, in order to determine both the minimum requirements permitted for qualification to bid, and the type and size of the contracts upon which each bidder shall be deemed qualified to bid. The uniform system of rating prospective bidders shall be based on objective criteria.

(c) A public entity may establish a process for prequalifying prospective bidders pursuant to this section on a quarterly basis and a prequalification pursuant
 to this process shall be valid for one calendar year following the date of initial prequalification.

(d) Any public entity requiring prospective bidders on a public works project to prequalify pursuant to this section shall establish a process that will allow prospective bidders to dispute their proposed prequalification rating prior to the closing time for receipt of bids. The appeal process shall include the following:

(1) Upon request of the prospective bidder, the public entity shall provide notification to the prospective bidder in writing of the basis for the prospective bidder’s disqualification and any supporting evidence that has been received from others or adduced as a result of an investigation by the public entity.

(2) The prospective bidder shall be given the opportunity to rebut any evidence used as a basis for disqualification and to present evidence to the public entity as to why the prospective bidder should be found qualified.

(3) If the prospective bidder chooses not to avail itself of this process, the proposed prequalification rating may be adopted without further proceedings.

(e) For the purposes of subdivision (a), a financial statement shall not be required from a contractor who has qualified as a Small Business Administration entity pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code, when the bid is no more than 25 percent of the qualifying amount provided in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government
 Code.

(f) Nothing in this section shall preclude an awarding agency from prequalifying or disqualifying a subcontractor. The disqualification of a subcontractor by an awarding agency does not disqualify an otherwise prequalified contractor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 360.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

20102.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this part to the contrary, where plans and specifications have been prepared by a public agency, whose activities are subject to this part, in order for a public project to be put out for formal or informal bid, and, subsequently, the public agency elects to perform the work by day’s labor, the public agency shall perform the work in strict accordance with these same plans and specifications.

Revisions of the plans and specifications may be made once a justification detailing the specific reasons for the change or changes has been approved by the public agency or its project director and a copy of the change and its justification is placed in the project file.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 694, Sec. 9.)
-------------------------------------------

20103.5.

In all contracts subject to this part where federal funds are involved, no bid submitted shall be invalidated by the failure of the bidder to be licensed in accordance with the laws of this state. However, at the time the contract is awarded, the contractor shall be properly licensed in accordance with the laws of this state. The first payment for work or material under any contract shall not be made unless and until the Registrar of Contractors verifies to the agency that the records of the Contractors’ State License Board indicate that the contractor was properly licensed at the time the contract was awarded. Any bidder or contractor not so licensed shall be subject to all legal penalties imposed by law, including, but not limited to, any appropriate disciplinary action by the Contractors’ State License Board. The agency shall include a statement to that effect in the standard form of prequalification questionnaire and financial statement. Failure of the bidder to obtain proper and adequate licensing for an award of a contract shall constitute a failure to execute the contract and shall result in the forfeiture of the security of the bidder.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 20104 by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1414, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20103.6.

(a) (1) Any local agency subject to this chapter shall, in the procurement of architectural design services requiring an expenditure in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000), include in any request for proposals for those services or invitations to bid from a prequalified list for a specific project a disclosure of any contract provision that would require the contracting architect to indemnify and hold harmless the local agency against any and all liability, whether or not caused by the activity of the contracting architect.

(2) The disclosure statement shall be prominently set forth in bold type.

(b) In the event a local agency fails to comply with paragraph (1) of subdivision (a), that local agency shall (1) be precluded from requiring the selected architect to agree to any contract provision requiring the selected architect to indemnify or hold harmless the local agency against any and all liability not caused by the activity of the selected architect, (2) cease discussions with the selected architect and reopen the request for proposals or invitations to bid from a qualification list, or (3) mutually agree to an indemnity clause acceptable to both parties.

(c) This section shall become operative on July 1, 1998.

(History: Added by Stats. 1997, Ch. 722, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1998.   Section operative July 1, 1998, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20103.7.

A local agency subject to this chapter taking bids for the construction of a public work or improvement shall, upon request from a contractor plan room service,
 provide an electronic copy of a project’s contract documents at no charge to the contractor plan room.

(History: Added by Stats. 2010, Ch. 371, Sec. 2.   (AB 2036)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.3. Award of Contracts [20103.8. - 20103.8.]

20103.8.

A local agency may require a bid for a public works contract to include prices for items that may be added to, or deducted from, the scope of work in the contract for which the bid is being submitted. Whenever additive or deductive items are included in a bid, the bid solicitation shall specify which one of the following methods will be used to determine the lowest bid. In the absence of a specification, only the method provided by subdivision (a) will be used:

(a) The lowest bid shall be the lowest bid price on the base contract without consideration of the prices on the additive or deductive items.

(b) The lowest bid shall be the lowest total of the bid prices on the base contract and those additive or deductive items that were specifically identified in the bid solicitation as being used for the purpose of determining the lowest bid price.

(c) The lowest bid shall be the lowest total of the bid prices on the base contract and those additive or deductive items that when taken in order from a specifically identified list of those items in the solicitation, and added to, or subtracted from, the base contract, are less than, or equal to, a funding amount publicly disclosed by the local agency before the first bid is opened.

(d) The lowest bid shall be determined in a manner that prevents any information that would identify any of the bidders or proposed subcontractors or suppliers from being revealed to the public entity before the ranking of all bidders from lowest to highest has been determined.

A responsible bidder who submitted the lowest bid as determined by this section shall be awarded the contract, if it is awarded. This section does not preclude the local agency from adding to or deducting from the contract any of the additive or deductive items after the lowest responsible bidder has been determined.

(e) Nothing in this section shall preclude the prequalification of subcontractors.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 62, Sec. 243.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.5. Resolution of Construction Claims [20104. - 20104.6.]

20104.

(a) (1) This article applies to all public works claims of three hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($375,000) or less which arise between a contractor and a local agency.

(2) This article shall not apply to any claims resulting from a contract between a contractor and a public agency when the public agency has elected to resolve any disputes pursuant to Article 7.1 (commencing with Section 10240) of Chapter 1 of Part 2.

(b) (1) “Public work” means “public works contract” as defined in Section 1101 but does not include any work or improvement contracted for by the state or
 the Regents of the University of California.

(2) “Claim” means a separate demand by the contractor for (A) a time extension, (B) payment of money or damages arising from work done by, or on behalf of, the contractor pursuant to the contract for a public work and payment of which is not otherwise expressly provided for or the claimant is not otherwise entitled to, or (C) an amount the payment of which is disputed by the local agency.

(c) The provisions of this article or a summary thereof shall be set forth in the plans or specifications for any work which may give rise to a claim under this article.

(d) This article applies only to contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1991.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 47.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20104.2.

For any claim subject to this article, the following requirements apply:

(a) The claim shall be in writing and include the documents necessary to substantiate the claim. Claims must be filed on or before the date of final payment. Nothing in this subdivision is intended to extend the time limit or supersede notice requirements otherwise provided by contract for the filing of claims.

(b) (1) For claims of less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the local agency shall respond in writing to any written claim within 45 days of receipt of the claim, or may request, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the claim, any additional documentation supporting the claim or relating to defenses to the claim the local agency may have against the claimant.

(2) If additional information is thereafter required, it shall be requested and provided pursuant to this subdivision, upon mutual agreement of the local agency and the claimant.

(3) The local agency’s written response to the claim, as further documented, shall be submitted to the claimant within 15 days after receipt of the further documentation or within a period of time no greater than that taken by the claimant in producing the additional information, whichever is greater.

(c) (1) For claims of over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) and less than or equal to three hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($375,000), the local agency shall respond in writing to all written claims within 60 days of receipt of the claim, or may request, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of the claim, any additional documentation supporting the claim or relating to defenses to the claim the local agency may have against the claimant.

(2) If additional information is thereafter required, it shall be requested and provided pursuant to this subdivision, upon mutual agreement of the local agency and the claimant.

(3) The local agency’s written response to the claim, as further documented, shall be submitted to the claimant within 30 days after receipt of the further documentation, or within a period of time no greater than that taken by the claimant in producing the additional information or requested documentation, whichever is greater.

(d) If the claimant disputes the local agency’s written response, or the local agency fails to respond within the time prescribed, the claimant may so notify the local agency, in writing, either within 15 days of receipt of the local agency’s response or within 15 days of the local agency’s failure to respond within the time prescribed, respectively, and demand an informal conference to meet and confer for settlement of the issues in dispute. Upon a demand, the local agency shall schedule a meet and confer conference within 30 days for settlement of the dispute.

(e) Following the meet and confer conference, if the claim or any portion remains in dispute, the claimant may file a claim as provided in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code. For purposes of those provisions, the running of the period of time within which a claim must be filed shall be tolled from the time the claimant submits his or her written claim pursuant to subdivision (a) until the time that claim is denied as a result of the meet and confer process, including any period of time utilized by the meet and confer process.

(f) This article does not apply to tort claims and nothing in this article is intended nor shall be construed to change the time periods for filing tort claims or actions specified by Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 726, Sec. 22.   Effective September 22, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

20104.4.

The following procedures are established for all civil actions filed to resolve claims subject to this article:

(a) Within 60 days, but no earlier than 30 days, following the filing or responsive pleadings, the court shall submit the matter to nonbinding mediation unless waived by mutual stipulation of both parties. The mediation process shall provide for the selection within 15 days by both parties of a disinterested third person as mediator, shall be commenced within 30 days of the submittal, and shall be concluded within 15 days from the commencement of the mediation unless a time requirement is extended upon a good cause showing to the court or by stipulation of both parties. If the parties fail to select a mediator within the 15-day period, any party may petition the court to appoint the mediator.

(b) (1) If the matter remains in dispute, the case shall be submitted to judicial arbitration pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 1141.10) of Title 3 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, notwithstanding Section 1141.11 of that code. The Civil Discovery Act (Title 4 (commencing with Section 2016.010) of Part 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure) shall apply to any proceeding brought under this subdivision consistent with the rules pertaining to judicial arbitration.

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, upon stipulation of the parties, arbitrators appointed for purposes of this article shall be experienced in construction law, and, upon stipulation of the parties, mediators and arbitrators shall be paid necessary and reasonable hourly rates of pay not to exceed their customary rate, and such fees and expenses shall be paid equally by the parties, except in the case of arbitration where the arbitrator, for good cause, determines a different division. In no event shall these fees or expenses be paid by state or county funds.

(3) In addition to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 1141.10) of Title 3 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, any party who after receiving an arbitration award requests a trial de novo but does not obtain a more favorable judgment shall, in addition to payment of costs and fees under that chapter, pay the attorney’s fees of the other party arising out of the trial de novo.

(c) The court may, upon request by any party, order any witnesses to participate in the mediation or arbitration process.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2004, Ch. 182, Sec. 54.   Effective January 1, 2005.   Operative July 1, 2005, by Sec. 64 of Ch. 182.)
-------------------------------------------

20104.6.

(a) No local agency shall fail to pay money as to any portion of a claim which is undisputed except as otherwise provided in the contract.

(b) In any suit filed under Section 20104.4, the local agency shall pay interest at the legal rate on any arbitration award or judgment. The interest shall begin to accrue on the date the suit is filed in a court of law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 726, Sec. 22.   Effective September 22, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.7. Modifications; Performance; Payment [20104.50. - 20104.50.]

20104.50.

(a) (1) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this section to require all local governments to pay their contractors on time so that these contractors can meet their own obligations. In requiring prompt payment by all local governments, the Legislature hereby finds and declares that the prompt payment of outstanding receipts is not merely a municipal affair, but is, instead, a matter of statewide concern.

(2) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this article to fully occupy the field of public policy relating to the prompt payment of local governments’ outstanding receipts. The Legislature finds and declares that all government officials, including those in local government, must set a standard of prompt payment that any business in the private sector which may contract for services should look towards for guidance.

(b) Any local agency which fails to make any progress payment within 30 days after receipt of an undisputed and properly submitted payment request from a contractor on a construction contract shall pay interest to the contractor equivalent to the legal rate set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 685.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

(c) Upon receipt of a payment request, each local agency shall act in accordance with both of the following:

(1) Each payment request shall be reviewed by the local agency as soon as practicable after receipt for the purpose of determining that the payment request is a proper payment request.

(2) Any payment request determined not to be a proper payment request suitable for payment shall be returned to the contractor as soon as practicable, but not later than seven days, after receipt. A request returned pursuant to this paragraph shall be accompanied by a document setting forth in writing the reasons why the payment request is not proper.

(d) The number of days available to a local agency to make a payment without incurring interest pursuant to this section shall be reduced by the number of days by which a local agency exceeds the seven-day return requirement set forth in paragraph (2) of subdivision (c).

(e) For purposes of this article:

(1) A “local agency” includes, but is not limited to, a city, including a charter city, a county, and a city and county, and is any public entity subject to this part.

(2) A “progress payment” includes all payments due contractors, except that portion of the final payment designated by the contract as retention earnings.

(3) A payment request shall be considered properly executed if funds are available for payment of the payment request, and payment is not delayed due to an audit inquiry by the financial officer of the local agency.

(f) Each local agency shall require that this article, or a summary thereof, be set forth in the terms of any contract subject to this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1992, Ch. 799, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 1.8. Damages Related to Competitive Bidding [20104.70. - 20104.70.]

20104.70.

(a) (1) The second lowest bidder, and any person, firm, association, trust, partnership, labor organization, corporation, or other legal entity which has, prior to the letting of the bids on the public works project in question, entered into a contract with the second lowest bidder, may bring an action in superior court if that entity suffers damages as a result of the bid of the second lowest bidder for any contract subject to this part not being accepted due to the successful bidder’s violation, as evidenced by the conviction of the successful bidder therefor, of any provision of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or of both. 

(2) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a successful bidder who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or of both, was awarded the bid because that successful bidder was able to lower the bid due to this violation or these violations occurring on the contract for public work awarded by the public agency. 

(b) In an action brought pursuant to this section, the court may award costs and reasonable attorney’s fees, in an amount to be determined in the court’s discretion, to the prevailing party. 

(c) For purposes of an action brought pursuant to this section: 

(1) Employee status shall be determined pursuant to Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code with respect to alleged violations of that division, pursuant to the Unemployment Insurance Code with respect to alleged violations of that code, or pursuant to Section 2750.5 of the Labor Code with respect to alleged violations of either Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or of both. 

(2) “Second lowest bidder” means the second lowest qualified bidder deemed responsive by the public agency awarding the contract for public work. 

(3) The “second lowest bidder” and the “successful bidder” may include any person, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity. 

(d) A second lowest bidder who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of Division 4 (commencing with Section 3200) of the Labor Code or of the Unemployment Insurance Code, or both, within one year prior to filing the bid for public work, and who has failed to take affirmative steps to correct that violation or those violations, is prohibited from taking any action authorized by this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 1991, Ch. 906, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. Schools—State School Building Aid Law of 1949 [20105. - 20107.]

20105.

This article shall apply to contracts subject to the State School Building Aid Law of 1949 provided for in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 15700) of Part 10 of the Education Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 539.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20106.

A school district shall not expend money apportioned under the State School Building Aid Law unless the contracts under which the funds are expended have been let after competitive bids pursuant to the Education Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20107.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the school district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the school district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the school district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the school district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. School Districts [20110. - 20118.4.]

20110.

The provisions of this part shall apply to contracts awarded by school districts subject to Part 21 (commencing with Section 35000) of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Education Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20111.

(a) (1) The governing board of any school district, in accordance with any requirement established by that governing board pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 2000, shall let any contracts involving an expenditure of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for any of the following:

(A) The purchase of equipment, materials, or supplies to be furnished, sold, or leased to the district.

(B) Services, except construction services.

(C) Repairs, including maintenance as defined in Section 20115, that are not a public project as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002.

(2) The governing board shall let the contract to the lowest responsible bidder who shall give security as the board requires, or else reject all bids.

(b) (1) The governing board shall let any contract for a public project, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002, involving an expenditure of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) or more, to the lowest responsible bidder who shall give security as the board requires, or else reject all bids. All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover, and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(A) Cash.

(B) A cashier’s check made payable to the school district.

(C) A
 certified check made payable to the school district.

(D) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the school district.

(2) Upon award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the school district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(c) Procurement bid solicitations and awards made by a school district approved to operate at least one federal nonprofit child nutrition program for purchases in support of those programs shall be consistent with the federal procurement standards in Sections 200.318 to 200.326, inclusive, of Part 200 of Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations. These awards shall be let to the most responsive and responsible party. The price shall
 be the primary consideration, but not the only determining factor.

(d) This section applies to all equipment, materials, or supplies, whether patented or otherwise, and to contracts awarded pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 2000. This section shall not apply to professional services or advice, insurance services, or any other purchase or service otherwise exempt from this section, or to any work done by day labor or by force account pursuant to Section 20114.

(e) Commencing January 1, 1997, the Superintendent of Public Instruction shall annually adjust the dollar amounts specified in subdivision (a) to reflect the percentage change in the annual average value of the Implicit Price Deflator for State and Local Government Purchases of Goods and Services for the United States, as published by the United States Department of Commerce for the 12-month period ending in the prior
 fiscal year. The annual adjustments shall be rounded to the nearest one hundred dollars ($100).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 395, Sec. 1.   (SB 544)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

20111.5.

(a) The governing board of the district may require that each prospective bidder for a contract, as described under Section 20111, complete and submit to the district a standardized questionnaire and financial statement in a form specified by the district, including a complete statement of the prospective bidder’s financial ability and experience in performing public works. The questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. The questionnaires and financial statements shall not be public records and shall not be open to public inspection.

(b) Any school district requiring prospective bidders to complete and submit questionnaires and financial statements, as described in subdivision (a), shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders on the basis of the completed questionnaires and financial statements, in order to determine the size of the contracts upon which each bidder shall be deemed qualified to bid.

(c) Each prospective bidder on any contract described under Section 20111 shall be furnished by the school district letting the contract with a standardized proposal form that, when completed and executed, shall be submitted as his or her bid. Bids not presented on the forms so furnished shall be disregarded. 

(d) A proposal form required pursuant to subdivision (c) shall not be accepted from any person or other entity who is required to submit a completed questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification pursuant to subdivision (a), but has not done so at least five days prior to the date fixed for the public opening of sealed bids or has not been prequalified, pursuant to subdivision (b), for at least one day prior to that date.

(e) Notwithstanding subdivision (d), any school district may establish a process for prequalifying prospective bidders pursuant to this section on a quarterly basis and may authorize that prequalification to be considered valid for up to one calendar year following the date of initial prequalification.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 390, Sec. 5.   Effective August 27, 1997.)
-------------------------------------------

20111.6.

(a) This section applies only to public projects, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002, for which the governing board of the school district uses state general funds, funds received pursuant to the Leroy F. Greene School Facilities Act of 1998 (Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 17070.10) of Part 10 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the Education Code), or any funds received, including funds reimbursed, from any future state school bond for a public project that involves a projected expenditure of one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more.

(b) If the governing board of the school district enters into a contract meeting the criteria of subdivision (a), then the governing board of
 the school district shall require that prospective bidders for a construction contract complete and submit to the governing board of the school district a standardized prequalification questionnaire and financial statement. The questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. The questionnaires and financial statements are not public records and shall not be open to public inspection.

(c) The governing board of the school district shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders on the basis of the completed questionnaires and financial statements. This system shall also apply to a person, firm, or corporation that constructs a building described in Section 17406 or 17407 of the Education Code.

(d) The questionnaire and financial statement described in subdivision (b), and the uniform system of rating bidders described in subdivision (c), shall cover, at a minimum, the issues covered by the standardized questionnaire and model guidelines for rating bidders developed by the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 20101.

(e) Each prospective bidder shall be furnished by the school district letting the contract with a standardized proposal form that, when completed and executed, shall be submitted as the prospective bidder’s bid. Bids not presented on the forms so furnished shall be disregarded.

(f) A proposal form required pursuant to subdivision (e) shall not be accepted from
 any person or other entity that is required to submit a completed questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification pursuant to subdivision (b) or from any person or other entity that uses a subcontractor that is required to submit a completed questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification pursuant to subdivision (b), but has not done so at least 10 business days before the date fixed for the public opening of sealed bids or has not been prequalified for at least 5 business days before that date. The school district may require the completed questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification to be submitted more than 10 business days before the fixed date for the public opening of sealed bids. The
 school district may also require the prequalification more than five business days before the fixed date.

(g) (1) The governing board of the school district may establish a process for prequalifying prospective bidders pursuant to this section on a quarterly or annual basis and a prequalification pursuant to this process shall be valid for one calendar year following the date of initial prequalification.

(2) The governing board of the school district shall establish a process to prequalify a person, firm, or corporation, including, but not limited to, the prime contractor and, if used, an electrical, mechanical, and plumbing subcontractor, to construct a building described in Section 17406 or 17407 of the Education Code on a quarterly or annual basis. A
 prequalification pursuant to this process shall be valid for one calendar year following the date of initial prequalification.

(h) This section does not preclude the governing board of the school district from prequalifying or disqualifying a subcontractor of any specialty classification described in Section 7058 of the Business and Professions Code.

(i) For purposes of this section, bidders shall include both of the following:

(1) A prime contractor, as defined in Section 4113, that is either of the following:

(A) A general engineering contractor described in Section 7056 of the Business and Professions Code.

(B) A general building contractor described in Section 7057 of the Business and Professions Code.

(2) If utilized, each electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractor, whether as a prime contractor or as a subcontractor, as defined in Section 4113.

(j) If a public project covered by this section includes electrical, mechanical, or plumbing components that will be performed by electrical, mechanical, or plumbing contractors, a list of prequalified general contractors and electrical, mechanical, and plumbing subcontractors shall be made available by the school district to all bidders at least five business days before the dates fixed for the public opening of sealed bids. The school district may require the list to be made available more than five business days before
 the fixed dates for the public opening of sealed bids.

(k) For purposes of this section, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing subcontractors are contractors licensed pursuant to Section 7058 of the Business and Professions Code, specifically contractors holding C-4, C-7, C-10, C-16, C-20, C-34, C-36, C-38, C-42, C-43, and C-46 licenses, pursuant to regulations of the Contractors’ State License Board.

(l) This section does not apply to a school district with an average daily attendance of less than 2,500.

(m) (1) This section applies only to contracts awarded on or after January 1, 2014.

(2) The amendments made to this section by Chapter 408 of
 the Statutes of 2014 apply only to contracts awarded on or after January 1, 2015.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 581, Sec. 1.   (AB 1433)   Effective January 1, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------

20112.

For the purpose of securing bids the governing board of a school district shall publish at least once a week for two weeks in some newspaper of general circulation published in the district, or if there is no such paper, then in some newspaper of general circulation, circulated in the county, and may post on the district’s Web site or through an electronic portal, a notice calling for bids, stating the work to be done or materials or supplies to be furnished and the time when and the place and the Web site where bids will be opened. Whether or not bids are opened exactly at the time fixed in the public notice for opening bids, a bid shall not be received after that time. The governing board of the district may accept a bid that was submitted either electronically or on paper.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2004, Ch. 739, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2005.)
-------------------------------------------

20113.

(a) In an emergency when any repairs, alterations, work, or improvement is necessary to any facility of public schools to permit the continuance of existing school classes, or to avoid danger to life or property, the board may, by unanimous vote, with the approval of the county superintendent of schools, do either of the following:

(1) Make a contract in writing or otherwise on behalf of the district for the performance of labor and furnishing of materials or supplies for the purpose without advertising for or inviting bids.

(2) Notwithstanding Section 20114, authorize the use of day labor or force account for the purpose.

(b) Nothing in this section shall eliminate the need for any bonds or security otherwise required by law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20114.

(a) In each school district, the governing board may make repairs, alterations, additions, or painting, repainting, or decorating upon school buildings, repair or build apparatus or equipment, make improvements on the school grounds, erect new buildings, and perform maintenance as defined in Section 20115 by day labor, or by force account, whenever the total number of hours on the job does not exceed 350 hours. Moreover, in any school district having an average daily attendance of 35,000 or greater, the governing board may, in addition, make repairs to school buildings, grounds, apparatus, or equipment, including painting or repainting, and perform maintenance, as defined in Section 20115, by day labor or by force account whenever the total number of hours on the job does not exceed 750 hours, or when the cost of material does not exceed twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000).

(b) For purposes of this section, day labor shall include the use of maintenance personnel employed on a permanent or temporary basis.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20115.

For purposes of Section 20114, “maintenance” means routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation, protection, and keeping of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes in a safe and continually usable condition for which it was designed, improved, constructed, altered, or repaired. “Facility” means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, or real property.

This definition of “maintenance” expressly includes, but is not limited to: carpentry, electrical, plumbing, glazing, and other craftwork designed consistent with the definition set forth above to preserve the facility in a safe, efficient, and continually usable condition for which it was intended, including repairs, cleaning, and other operations on machinery and other equipment permanently attached to the building or realty as fixtures.

This definition does not include, among other types of work, janitorial or custodial services and protection of the sort provided by guards or other security forces.

It is the intent of the Legislature that this definition does not include painting, repainting, or decorating other than touchup, but instead it is the intent of the Legislature that such activities be controlled directly by the provisions of Section 20114.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20116.

It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any work, project, service, or purchase for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring contracting after competitive bidding.

The district shall maintain job orders or similar records indicating the total cost expended on each project in accordance with the procedures established in the most recent edition of the California School Accounting Manual for a period of not less than three years after completion of the project.

Informal bidding may be used on work, projects, services, or purchases that cost up to the limits set forth in this article. For the purpose of securing informal bids, the board shall publish annually in a newspaper of general circulation published in the district, or if there is no such newspaper, then in some newspaper in general circulation in the county, a notice inviting contractors to register to be notified of future informal bidding projects. All contractors included on the informal bidding list shall be given notice of all informal bid projects in any manner as the district deems appropriate.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20117.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the event there are two or more identical lowest or highest bids, as the case may be, submitted to a school district for the purchase, sale, or lease of real property, supplies, materials, equipment, services, bonds, or the awarding of any contract, pursuant to a provision requiring competitive bidding, the governing board of any school district may determine by lot which bid shall be accepted.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1452, Sec. 527.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.

Notwithstanding Sections 20111 and 20112, the governing board of any school district, without advertising for bids, if the board has determined it to be in the best interests of the district, may authorize by contract, lease, requisition, or purchase order, any public corporation or agency, including any county, city, town, or district, to lease data-processing equipment, purchase materials, supplies, equipment, automotive vehicles, tractors, and other personal property for the district in the manner in which the public corporation or agency is authorized by law to make the leases or purchases from a vendor. Upon receipt of the personal property, if the property complies with the specifications set forth in the contract, lease, requisition, or purchase order, the school district may draw a warrant in favor of the public corporation or agency for the amount of the approved invoice, including the reasonable costs to the public corporation or agency for furnishing the services incidental to the lease or purchase of the personal property, or the school district may make payment directly to the vendor. Alternatively, if there is an existing contract between a public corporation or agency and a vendor for the lease or purchase of the personal property, a school district may authorize the lease or purchase of personal property directly from the vendor by contract, lease, requisition, or purchase order and make payment to the vendor under the same terms that are available to the public corporation or agency under the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 730, Sec. 19.75.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.1.

The governing board of any school district may contract with an acceptable party who is one of the three lowest responsible bidders for the procurement or maintenance, or both, of electronic data-processing systems and supporting software in any manner the board deems appropriate.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1452, Sec. 529.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.2.

(a) Due to the highly specialized and unique nature of technology, telecommunications, related equipment, software, and services, because products and materials of that nature are undergoing rapid technological changes, and in order to allow for the introduction of new technological changes into the operations of the school district, it is in the public’s best interest to allow a school district to consider, in addition to price, factors such as vendor financing, performance reliability, standardization, life-cycle costs, delivery timetables, support logistics, the broadest possible range of competing products and materials available, fitness of purchase, manufacturer’s warranties, and similar factors in the award of contracts for technology, telecommunications, related equipment, software, and services.

(b) This section applies only to a school district’s procurement of computers, software, telecommunications equipment, microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus. This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product that is available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(c) Notwithstanding Section 20118.1, a school district may, after a finding is made by the governing board that a particular procurement qualifies under subdivision (b), authorize the procurement of the product through competitive negotiation as described in subdivision (d).

(d) For purposes of this section, competitive negotiation includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

(1) A request for proposals shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the school district, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirement of the procurement.

(2) Notice of the request for proposals shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation, at least 10 days before the date for receipt of the proposals.

(3) The school district shall make every effort to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposals is received.

(4) The request for proposals shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(5) The school district shall provide reasonable procedures for the technical evaluation of the proposals received, the identification of qualified sources, and the selection for the award of the contract.

(6) Award shall be made to the qualified bidder whose proposal meets the evaluation standards and will be most advantageous to the school district with price and all other factors considered.

(7) If award is not made to the bidder whose proposal contains the lowest price, the school district shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(e) The school district, at its discretion, may reject all proposals and request new proposals.

(f) Provisions in any contract concerning utilization of small business enterprises, that are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful proposer.

(History: Added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 509, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.3.

The governing board of any school district may purchase supplementary textbooks, library books, educational films, audiovisual materials, test materials, workbooks, instructional computer software packages, or periodicals in any amount needed for the operation of the schools of the district without taking estimates or advertising for bids.

This section shall become operative January 1, 1989, and is declaratory of existing law and practice.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 439, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.4.

(a) If any change or alteration of a contract governed by Article 3 (commencing with Section 17595) of Chapter 5 of Part 10.5 of the Education Code is ordered by the governing board of the district, the change or alteration shall be specified in writing and the cost agreed upon between the governing board and the contractor. The board may authorize the contractor to proceed with performance of the change or alteration, without the formality of securing bids, if the cost so agreed upon does not exceed the greater of the following:

(1) The amount specified in Section 20111 or 20114, whichever is applicable to the original contract.

(2) Ten percent of the original contract price.

(b) The governing board of any school district, or of two or more school districts governed by governing boards of identical personnel, having an average daily attendance of 400,000 or more as shown by the annual report of the county superintendent of schools for the preceding year, may also authorize any change or alteration of a contract for reconstruction or rehabilitation work, other than for the construction of new buildings or other new structures, if the cost of the change or alteration is in excess of the limitations in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) but does not exceed 25 percent of the original contract price, without the formality of securing bids, and the change or alteration is a necessary and integral part of the work under the contract and the taking of bids would delay the completion of the contract. Changes exceeding 15 percent of the original contract price shall be approved by an affirmative vote of not less than 75 percent of the members of the governing board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 540.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3.1. Task Order Contracting for School Districts [20118.5. - 20118.9.]

20118.5.

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature to enable school districts to use cost-effective options for renovating and repairing school facilities and grounds.

(b) It is the intent of the Legislature to provide an optional alternative procedure for bidding on these projects. It is the intent of the Legislature that the task order procurement method improve contract efficiencies and reduce the general fund impact to school districts by reducing contract delays producing a savings in both contract costs and administration.

(c) It is the intent of the Legislature that task order contracts be competitively bid for
 and awarded to the bidders providing the most qualified responsive bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 129, Sec. 1.   (AB 2488)   Effective January 1, 2019.   Repealed as of January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 20118.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.6.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the governing board of a school district may award multiple task order procurement contracts for the repair and renovation of school buildings and grounds, each not exceeding three million dollars ($3,000,000) through a single request for bid. For purposes of this article, task order procurement contracts may include, but are not limited to, services, repairs, including maintenance, and construction, as authorized in Section 20111, paid for with moneys from the school district’s general fund, a local school construction bond, or federal or state funds. The scope of a contract awarded pursuant to this article shall be limited to the purposes authorized by its funding source. The contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, and shall be based primarily on
 plans and specifications for typical work.

(b) For purposes of this section, “school district” means the Los Angeles Unified School District.

(c) Before entering into a contract under this section, a school district shall ensure that it is in compliance with Section 45103.1 of the Education Code.

(d) (1) A task order procurement
 contract shall only be awarded to supplement existing personnel and shall not be used to supplant existing personnel.

(2) A task order procurement contract authorized by this article shall not include services currently or customarily performed by represented employees who are in the school district’s Collective Bargaining Unit B, C, D, G, F, or S.

(e) A school district may utilize task order procurement contracting pursuant to this article only if the school district has entered into a project labor agreement or agreements that meet the requirements of Section 2500 for all its public works projects.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 523, Sec. 1.   (AB 439)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 20118.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.7.

(a) (1) On or before January 15, 2029, and on or before January 15, 2033, a school district that uses the task order procurement contracting method pursuant to this article shall submit to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature a report on the use of the task order procurement contracting method. The report shall be prepared by an independent third party and the school district shall pay for the cost of the report.

(2) The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

(A) A description of the projects awarded using the task order procurement contracting method.

(B) The contract award amounts.

(C) The task order contractors awarded the projects.

(D) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, or award of the task order procurement contracts, including the resolution of the protests.

(E) A description of the prequalification process.

(F) If a project awarded under this article has been completed, an assessment of the performance on a per project basis, including, but not limited to, a summary of any delays or cost increases. The report may also include an assessment of the performance on a per contractor basis.

(b) (1) Pursuant to Section 10231.5 of the Government Code,
 this section is inoperative on January 1, 2034.

(2) A report to be submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 523, Sec. 2.   (AB 439)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Inoperative January 1, 2034, by its own provisions.   Repealed as of January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 20118.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.8.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, the task order procurement contracting method is not intended to change any guideline, criterion, procedure, or requirement of the governing board of the school district to let a contract for a project to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 129, Sec. 1.   (AB 2488)   Effective January 1, 2019.   Repealed as of January 1, 2034, pursuant to Section 20118.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20118.9.

This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2034, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 523, Sec. 3.   (AB 439)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2034, by its own provisions.    Note: Repeal affects Article 3.1, commencing with Section 20118.5.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3.3. Los Angeles Unified School District — Best Value Procurement [20119. - 20119.5.]

20119.

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature to enable school districts to use cost-effective options for building and modernizing school facilities. The Legislature has recognized the merits of the best value procurement method process in the past by authorizing its use for projects undertaken by the University of California.

(b) The Legislature finds and declares that school districts using the best value procurement method require a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities
 of each participant in the best value process. As reflected in the University of California report to the Legislature, the benefits of a best value procurement method include a reduction in contract delays, change orders, and claims producing a savings in both contract costs and administration.

(c) The Legislature further finds and declares that the best value procurement method has provided the benefits of more qualified contractors applying and an open dialogue on project approach, according to the Los Angeles Unified School District’s interim report to the Legislature from November 2019, titled “Los Angeles Unified School District, Final Report on Best Value Procurement Method.”

(d) The Legislature also finds and declares that the Los Angeles Unified School District
 achieved expected benefits from the best
 value method such as fewer change orders, less schedule delays, and fewer claims according to the Los Angeles Unified School District’s final report to the Legislature from December 2024, titled “Los Angeles Unified School District, Review of the Best Value Procurement Method.” 

(e) It is the intent of the Legislature to provide to all school districts an optional, alternative procedure for bidding and building school construction projects.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 1.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.1.

As used in this article:

(a) “Best value” means a procurement process whereby the selected bidder may be selected on the basis of objective criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders with the resulting selection representing the best combination of price and qualifications.

(b) “Best value contract” means a competitively bid contract entered into pursuant to this article.

(c) “Best value contractor” means a properly licensed person, firm, or corporation that submits a bid for and is awarded a best value contract.

(d) “Best value score” means the resulting score when the school
 district divides the bidder’s price by the bidder’s qualification score.

(e) “Demonstrated management competency” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity of the proposed management staffing to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity.

(f) “Financial condition” means the financial resources needed to perform the contract. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s financial condition shall include, at a minimum, capacity to obtain all required payment bonds and required insurance.

(g) “Governing board” or “governing board of the school district” means the governing board of the Los Angeles Unified School District.

(h) “Labor
 compliance” means the ability to comply with, and past conformance with, contract and statutory requirements for the payment of wages and qualifications of the workforce. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s labor compliance shall include, at a minimum, the bidder’s ability to comply with the apprenticeship requirements of the California Apprenticeship Council and the Department of Industrial Relations, its past conformance with such requirements, and its past conformance with requirements to pay prevailing wages on public works projects.

(i) “Project” has the same meaning as “public project,” as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002.

(j) “Qualifications” means financial condition, relevant experience, demonstrated management competency, labor compliance, the
 safety record of the bidder, and, to the extent relevant, the preceding qualifications as they pertain to all subcontractors proposed to be used by the bidder for designated portions of the work.

(k) “Relevant experience” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity.

(l) “Safety record” shall be deemed “acceptable” if a contractor’s experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and the contractor’s average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period do not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the bidder is a party to an alternative dispute resolution
 system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(m) “School district” means the Los Angeles Unified School District.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 46, Sec. 2.   (AB 1981)   Effective January 1, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.2.

(a) The governing board, for projects over one million dollars ($1,000,000), may use the best value procurement method in accordance with this article.

(b) The bidder may be selected on the basis of the best value to the governing board of the school district. In order to implement this method of selection, the governing board of the school district shall adopt and publish procedures and required guidelines for evaluating the qualifications of the bidders that ensure the best value selections by the school district are conducted in a fair and impartial manner. These procedures and guidelines shall conform to this article and shall be mandatory for the school district when using
 best value selection.

(c) If the governing board of the school district deems it to be for the best interest of the school district, the governing board of the school district, on the refusal or failure of the selected bidder for a project to execute a tendered contract, may award it to the bidder with the second lowest best value score. If the second bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the governing board of the school district may likewise award it to the bidder with the third lowest best value score.

(d) The governing board of the school district shall let any contract for a project pursuant to this article to the selected bidder that represents the best value or else reject all bids.

(e) (1) If the school district elects to award a project pursuant to this section, retention proceeds withheld by the district from the selected best value contractor shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(2) In a contract between the selected best value contractor and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the district and the selected best value contractor. If the selected best value contractor provides written notice to a subcontractor that, prior to or at the time the bid is requested, a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses
 to furnish a bond to the selected best value contractor, then the selected best value contractor may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the district and the selected best value contractor from any payment made by the selected best value contractor to the subcontractor.

(f) All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded the protection contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 2.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.3.

The governing board of the school district shall proceed in accordance with the following when awarding best value contracts under this article:

(a) The school district shall prepare a solicitation for bids and give notice pursuant to Section 20112.

(b) (1) The school district shall establish a procedure to prequalify bidders as required by this code. Information submitted by the bidder as part of the evaluation process shall not be open to public inspection to the extent that information is exempt from disclosure under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the
 Government Code).

(2) A best value entity shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the governing board that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(3) Paragraph (2) shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(A) The school district has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled
 and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the school district prior to January 1, 2025.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(4) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(c) Each solicitation for bids shall do all of the
 following:

(1) Invite prequalified bidders to submit sealed bids in the manner prescribed by this article.

(2) Include a section identifying and describing the following:

(A) Criteria that the school district will consider in evaluating the qualifications of the bidders.

(B) The methodology and rating or weighting system that will be used by the school district in evaluating bids.

(C) The relative importance or weight assigned to the criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders identified in the request for bids.

(d) Final
 evaluation of the bidders shall be done in a manner that prevents the identity of the bidders and the cost or price information from being revealed in evaluating the qualifications of the bidders prior to completion of qualification scoring.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 3.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.4.

Selection of the best value contractor shall be made as follows:

(a) (1) The school district shall evaluate the qualifications of the bidders based solely upon the criteria set forth in the solicitation documents, and shall assign a qualification score to each bid.

(2) Qualification scores shall be determined by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for proposals. The following minimum factors, however, shall be weighted as deemed appropriate by the school district:

(A) Relevant experience.

(B) Safety record.

(C) Other factors identified in the request for proposal.

(b) To determine the best value contractor, the school district shall divide each bidder’s price by its qualifications score. A preference of up to 5 percent shall be applied to the price of a bid submitted by a small business, as defined by the school district, before dividing the bidder’s price by its qualification score. The lowest resulting cost per quality point will represent the best value bid. The award of the contract shall be made to the bidder whose bid is determined, by the school district in writing, to be the best value to the school district.

(c) The school district
 shall issue a written decision of its contract award or else reject all bids.

(d) Upon issuance of a contract award, the school district shall publicly announce its award identifying the project, the project price, the best value contractor to which the award is made, as well as the prices, qualification scores, and resulting costs per qualification point for all responsive bidders. The contract file shall include documentation sufficient to support the decision to award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 786, Sec. 1.   (AB 1185)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.5.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, the best value procurement method is not intended to change any guideline, criterion, procedure, or requirement of the governing board of the school district to let a contract for a project to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 20119.6 by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 5.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3.4. Best Value Procurement for School Districts  [20119.8. - 20119.13.]

20119.8.

As used in this article: 

(a) “Best value” means a procurement process whereby the selected bidder may be selected on the basis of objective criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders with the resulting selection representing the best combination of price and qualifications. 

(b) “Best value contract” means a competitively bid contract entered into pursuant to this article. 

(c) “Best value contractor” means a properly licensed person, firm, or corporation that submits a bid for and is awarded a best value contract. 

(d) “Best value score” means the resulting score when the school district divides the bidder’s price by the bidder’s qualification score. 

(e) “Demonstrated management competency” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity of the proposed management staffing to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity. 

(f) “Financial condition” means the financial resources needed to perform the contract. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s financial condition shall include, at a minimum, capacity to obtain all required payment bonds and required insurance. 

(g) (1) “Governing board” or “governing board of the school district” means the governing board of a school district.

(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), “school district” does not include the Los Angeles Unified School District.

(h) “Labor compliance” means the ability to comply with, and past conformance with, contract and statutory requirements for the payment of wages and qualifications of the workforce. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s labor compliance shall include, at a minimum, the bidder’s ability to comply with the apprenticeship requirements of the California Apprenticeship Council and the Department of Industrial Relations, its past conformance
 with such requirements, and its past conformance with requirements to pay prevailing wages on public works projects. 

(i) “Project” has the same meaning as “public project,” as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002. 

(j) “Qualifications” means financial condition, relevant experience,
 demonstrated management competency, labor compliance, the safety record of the bidder, and, to the extent relevant, the preceding qualifications as they pertain to all subcontractors proposed to be used by the bidder for designated portions of the work. 

(k) “Relevant experience” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity. 

(l) “Safety record” shall be deemed “acceptable” if a contractor’s experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and the contractor’s average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period do not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the bidder is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 7.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 20119.13.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.9.

(a) The governing board, for projects over one million dollars ($1,000,000), before December 31, 2030, may use the best value procurement method in accordance with this article. 

(b) The bidder may be selected on the basis of the best value to the governing board of the school district. In order to implement this method of selection, the governing board of the school district shall adopt and publish procedures and required guidelines for evaluating the qualifications of the bidders that ensure the best value selections by the school district are conducted in a fair and impartial manner. These procedures and guidelines shall conform to this article and shall be mandatory for the school district when using best value selection.

(c) If the governing board of the school district deems it to be for the best interest of the school
 district, the governing board of the school district, on the refusal or failure of the selected bidder for a project to execute a tendered contract, may award it to the bidder with the second lowest best value score. If the second bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the governing board of the school district may likewise award it to the bidder with the third lowest best value score. 

(d) The governing board of the school district
 shall let any contract for a project pursuant to this article to the selected bidder that represents the best value or else reject all bids. 

(e) (1) If the school district elects to award a project pursuant to this section, retention proceeds withheld by the school district from the selected best value contractor shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(2) In a contract between the selected best value contractor and a subcontractor, and
 in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the school district and the selected best value contractor. If the selected best value contractor provides written notice to a subcontractor that, prior to or at the time the bid is requested, a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the selected best value contractor, then the selected best value contractor may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the school district and the selected best value
 contractor from any payment made by the selected best value contractor to the subcontractor.

(f) All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded the protection contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 7.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 20119.13.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.10.

The governing board of the school district shall proceed in accordance with all of the following when awarding best value contracts under this article: 

(a) The school district shall prepare a solicitation for bids and give notice pursuant to Section 20112. 

(b) (1) The school district shall establish a procedure to prequalify bidders as required by this code. Information submitted by the bidder as part of the evaluation process shall not be open to public inspection to the extent that information is exempt from disclosure under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code). 

(2) A best value entity shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the governing board of the school district that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable
 occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1. 

(3) Paragraph (2) shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met: 

(A) The school district has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement. 

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the school
 district prior to January 1, 2025. 

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce. 

(4) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500. 

(c) Each solicitation for bids shall do all of the following: 

(1) Invite prequalified bidders to submit sealed bids in the manner prescribed by this article. 

(2) Include a section identifying and describing all of the following: 

(A) Criteria that the school district will consider in evaluating the qualifications of the bidders. 

(B) The methodology and rating or weighting system that will be used by the school district in evaluating bids. 

(C) The relative importance or weight assigned to the criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders identified in the request for bids.

(d) Final evaluation of the bidders shall be done in a manner that prevents the identity of the bidders and the cost or price information from being revealed in evaluating the qualifications of the bidders prior to completion of qualification scoring.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 7.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 20119.13.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.11.

(a) (1) (A) A school district that uses the best value procurement method pursuant to this article shall submit to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature a report on the use of the best value procurement method. 

(B) The report shall be prepared by an independent third party and the school district shall pay for the cost of the report. 

(C) Multiple school districts may work together to submit a single report reflecting each of the participating school districts.

(D) The report shall be submitted on or before January 1, 2030, to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature. 

(2) The report shall include, but is not limited to, all of the following information:

(A) A description of the projects awarded using the
 best value procedures. 

(B) The contract award amounts.

(C) The names of the best value contractors awarded the projects.

(D) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, or award of the best value contracts, including the resolution of the protests.

(E) A description of the prequalification process.

(F) The criteria used to evaluate the bids, including the weighting of the criteria and an assessment of the effectiveness of the methodology.

(G) If a project awarded under this article has been
 completed, an assessment of the project performance, including a summary of any delays or cost increases.

(b) (1) The requirement for submitting a report imposed under subdivision (a) is inoperative on January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 10231.5 of the Government Code.

(2) A report to be submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 7.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 20119.13.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.12.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, the best value procurement method is not intended to change any guideline, criterion, procedure, or requirement of the governing board of the school district to let a contract for a project to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 7.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 20119.13.)
-------------------------------------------

20119.13.

This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2031, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 144, Sec. 7.   (AB 361)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Article 3.4, commencing with Section 20119.8.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3.5. Counties [20120. - 20147.]

20120.

This article applies to public works contracts awarded by counties subject to Title 3 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Government Code. For purposes of this article, the population of a county shall be the most recent estimate determined by the Demographic Research Unit of the Department of Finance.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 29, Sec. 128.   (SB 82)   Effective June 27, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

20121.

Whenever the estimated cost of construction of any wharf, chute, or other shipping facility, or of any hospital, almshouse, courthouse, jail, historical museum, aquarium, county free library building, branch library building, art gallery, art institute, exposition building, stadium, coliseum, sports arena or sports pavilion or other building for holding sports events, athletic contests, contests of skill, exhibitions, spectacles and other public meetings, or other public building or the cost of any painting, or repairs thereto exceeds the sum of four thousand dollars ($4,000), inclusive of the estimated costs of materials or supplies to be furnished pursuant to Section 20131, the work shall be done by contract. Any such contract not let pursuant to this article is void.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20121.1.

Notwithstanding Section 20121, a county board of supervisors need not contract for grading, drainage, pipe laying, fencing, landscaping, instrument installation, and similar construction and repair work necessary to maintain day-to-day landfill operations.

(History: Added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 907, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20122.

In counties containing a population of 500,000 or over, the work referred to in Section 20121 need not be done by contract if the estimated cost thereof is less than six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500), exclusive of the estimated cost of materials or supplies to be furnished pursuant to Section 20133.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20123.

(a) In counties containing a population of 2,000,000 or over, as determined by the last federal or special census or subsequent estimate validated by the Demographic Research Unit of the Department of Finance, Sections 20121 and 20122 do not apply to alteration or repair work upon county-owned buildings, if the cost of the work is under
 fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).

(b) (1) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), in a county with a population of 9,000,000 or over, as determined by the last federal or special census or subsequent estimate validated by the Demographic Research Unit of the Department of Finance, Sections 20121 and 20122 do not apply to the alteration or repair work upon county-owned buildings, if the cost of the work is under one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000). 

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the amount described in subdivision (a) of Section 22032 is equal to or exceeds one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 52, Sec. 1.   (SB 409)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------

20123.5.

In any county, it is unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any public work project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring public work to be done by contract after competitive bidding. Every person who willfully violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20124.

(a) The board of supervisors shall adopt plans, specifications, strain sheets, and working details for the work.

(b) The Board of Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles may delegate the duties described in subdivision (a) to the director of public works in the following manner:

(1) For projects in excess of the dollar limit specified in Section 20145, the board of supervisors may delegate duties described in subdivision (a) on a project-by-project basis.

(2) For projects at or below the dollar limit specified in Section 20145, the
 board of supervisors may delegate the duties described in subdivision (a) pursuant to that section.

(c) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 19.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.   See later operative version added by Sec. 20 of Stats. 2020, Ch. 371.)
-------------------------------------------

20124.

(a) The board of supervisors shall adopt plans, specifications, strain sheets, and working details for the work. 

(b) For projects at or below the dollar limit specified in Section 20145, the Board of Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles may delegate the duties described in subdivision (a) to the director of public works pursuant to Section 20145.

(c) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2030.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 19) and added by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 20.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Section operative January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20125.

The board shall cause an advertisement for bids for the performance of the work to be published pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code in a daily newspaper, or pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in a weekly newspaper, of general circulation published in the county. If there is no such newspaper published in the county, the notice shall be given by posting in three public places for at least two weeks.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20126.

Any notice inviting bids which specifies locations of possible materials, such as a borrow pit or gravel bed, for use in the proposed construction project which would be subject to Section 1602 of the Fish and Game Code shall include any conditions or modifications established pursuant to Section 1603 of the Fish and Game Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 383, Sec. 9.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

20127.

All bidders shall be afforded opportunity to examine the plans, specifications, strain sheets, and working details.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20128.

The board shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder, and the person to whom the contract is awarded shall perform the work in accordance with the plans, specifications, strain sheets, and working details, unless the contract is modified by a four-fifths vote of the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20128.5.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the board of supervisors may award individual annual contracts, none of which shall exceed three million dollars ($3,000,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index, for repair, remodeling, or other repetitive work to be done according to unit prices. No annual contracts may be awarded for any new construction. The contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder and shall be based on plans and specifications for typical work. No project shall be performed under the contract except by order of the board of supervisors, or an officer acting pursuant to Section 20145.

For purposes of this section, “unit price” means the amount paid for a single unit of an item of work, and “typical work” means a work description applicable universally or applicable to a large number of individual projects, as distinguished from work specifically described with respect to an individual project.

For purposes of this section, “repair, remodeling, or other repetitive work to be done according to unit prices” shall not include design or contract drawings.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 431, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

20129.

(a) All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security: 

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the county.

(3) A certified check made payable to the county.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the county.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the county beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(b) The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond to be approved by the board for the faithful performance of the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 5.)
-------------------------------------------

20130.

If the board of supervisors is advised by the county surveyor or engineer that any wharf, chute, or other shipping facility can be constructed or repaired for a sum less than the lowest responsible bid, it may reject all bids and order the work done by day’s work under the supervision and direction of the surveyor or engineer.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20131.

Counties which employ purchasing agents may:

(a) Authorize the agent to employ state-licensed independent contractors and purchase materials, furnishings, and supplies used in the construction or repair of public works estimated as costing not more than six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500) without the formality of obtaining bids, letting contracts, preparing specifications, and the other things required by this article.

(b) In counties containing a population of 500,000 or more, authorize the agent to purchase materials and supplies used in the construction or repair of public works estimated as costing not more than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) without the formality of obtaining bids, letting contracts, preparing specifications, and the other things required by this article.

(c) Authorize the agent to purchase or contract for medical or surgical equipment or supplies, or for professional services, for a county hospital without competitive bidding, so long as an appropriation for the costs of those purchases or contracts is included in the county budget.

As used in this subdivision, “medical or surgical equipment or supplies” means only equipment or supplies commonly, necessarily, and directly used by or under the direction of a physician and surgeon in caring for or treating a patient in a hospital.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1195, Sec. 22.5.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

20132.

The board of supervisors of any county may delegate to the county administrative officer or the county executive officer in an equivalent position, the power to enter into and execute on behalf of the county any contracts, which do not involve the expenditure of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000), which relate to purposes previously approved and budgeted by the board of supervisors, subject to ratification of such approval and execution by the board of supervisors. This section shall not apply to:

(a) Matters within the purview of Section 20131.

(b) Contracts for the construction of public improvements.

(c) Contracts which must be awarded after public notice and competitive bidding.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20134.

(a) In cases of emergency, when repair or replacements are necessary to permit the continued conduct of county operations or services, the board of supervisors, by majority consent, may proceed at once to replace or repair any and all structures without adopting the plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details or, subject to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050), giving notice for bids to let contracts. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. If the work is done wholly or in part by contract, the contractor shall be paid the actual
 cost of the use of machinery and tools and of material, and labor and of workers’ compensation insurance expended by him or her in doing the work, plus not more than 15 percent to cover all profits and administration. No more than the lowest current market prices shall be paid for materials whenever possible.

(b) In a county of the first, second, third, or fourth class, which is under court order to relieve jail overcrowding or in which the sheriff certifies that the inmate capacity of the county jail system is exceeded by more than 20 percent and that the overpopulation is likely to continue and poses a threat to public safety, health, and welfare, the board of supervisors may contract for the construction or expansion of jail facilities without the formality of obtaining bids, adopting plans and specifications, or complying with other requirements of this article, except as required by this subdivision. The person to whom the contract is
 awarded shall execute a bond for faithful performance in accordance with Section 20129. Any plans and specifications adopted by the board may only be altered or changed in accordance with Section 20135 and all contracts awarded pursuant to this subdivision may only be altered or changed in accordance with Sections 20136, 20137, and 20138. The award of the contract shall be made after a public hearing on the basis of a request for proposals advertised in accordance with Section 6062 or 6062a of the Government Code. The contract may be awarded only to a contractor who has responded to the request for proposals and who is licensed to do the work in accordance with Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. The contract shall be upon terms which the board determines are necessary for the expeditious completion of the work. A contract shall not be entered into unless at least three proposals to do the work have been evaluated by a competitive process established
 by the board. If the board does not select the lowest bid, it shall make a finding stating the reasons that the lowest bid was not selected.

(c) In any county that has agreed to permit the transfer of prisoners or parole violators under Section 2910 or 2910.5 of the Penal Code or of wards under Section 1753.3 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, the board of supervisors may contract for the construction or expansion of the facilities to be used for that purpose without the formality of obtaining bids, adopting plans and specifications, or complying with other requirements of this article, except as required by this subdivision. The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond for faithful performance in accordance with Section 20129. Any plans and specifications adopted by the board may only be altered or changed in accordance with Section 20135 and all contracts awarded pursuant to this subdivision may only be altered or
 changed in accordance with Sections 20136, 20137, and 20138. The award of the contract shall be made after a public hearing on the basis of a request for proposals advertised in accordance with Section 6062 or 6062a of the Government Code. The contract may be awarded only to a contractor who has responded to the request for proposals and who is licensed to do the work in accordance with Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. The contract shall be upon terms which the board determines are necessary for the expeditious completion of the work. A contract shall not be entered into unless at least three proposals to do the work have been evaluated by a competitive process established by the board and the lowest bid is selected.

(d) Proposed construction or expansion of jail or return-to-custody facilities as authorized under subdivision (b) or (c) shall not commence in a county of the third class
 without the affirmative vote of a majority of the city council of the incorporated city within which the construction or expansion is proposed.

(e) The board of supervisors may waive the requirements of Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code for work performed pursuant to subdivision (b) or (c).

(f) If any county that is under court order to relieve overcrowding in a county juvenile facility, as defined by subdivision (c) of Section 4481 of the Penal Code or in which the chief probation officer certifies that the juvenile detention capacity of the county juvenile facilities is exceeded by more than 20 percent and that the overpopulation is likely to continue and poses a threat to public safety, health, and welfare, the board of supervisors may contract for the construction or expansion of county juvenile facilities without the formality of
 obtaining bids, adopting plans and specifications, or complying with other requirements of this article, except as required by this subdivision. The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond for faithful performance in accordance with Section 20129. Any plans and specifications adopted by the board may only be altered or changed in accordance with Section 20135 and all contracts awarded pursuant to this subdivision may only be altered or changed in accordance with Sections 20136, 20137, and 20138. The award of the contract shall be made after a public hearing on the basis of a request for proposals advertised in accordance with Section 6062 or 6062a of the Government Code. The contract may be awarded only to a contractor who has responded to the request for proposals and who is licensed to do the work in accordance with Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. The contract shall be upon terms which the board determines are necessary for
 the expeditious completion of the work. A contract shall not be entered into unless at least three proposals to do the work have been evaluated by a competitive process established by the board. If the board does not select the lowest bidder, it shall make a finding stating the reasons that the lowest bidder was not selected.

(g) In a county of the third class in which there are no available courtrooms to accommodate all authorized judicial positions or in which the board of supervisors certifies that there is a significant need to expeditiously construct new court and court support facilities, the board of supervisors may contract for the construction or expansion of court and court support facilities without the formality of obtaining bids, adopting plans and specifications, or complying with other requirements of this article, except as required by this subdivision. The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond for faithful
 performance in accordance with Section 20129. Any plans and specifications adopted by the board may only be altered or changed in accordance with Section 20135 and all contracts awarded pursuant to this subdivision may only be altered or changed in accordance with Sections 20136, 20137, and 20138. The award of the contract shall be made after a public hearing on the basis of a request for proposals advertised in accordance with Section 6062 or 6062a of the Government Code. The contract may be awarded only to a contractor who has responded to the request for proposals and who is licensed to do the work in accordance with Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. The contract shall be upon terms which the board determines are necessary for the expeditious completion of the work. A contract shall not be entered into unless at least three proposals to do the work have been evaluated by a competitive process established by the board and the lowest bid is
 selected. This subdivision shall remain in effect until December 31, 1994.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 48.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20135.

The plans and specifications adopted by the board for the erection, alteration, construction, or repair of any public building or other public structure shall not be altered or changed in any manner which increases its cost, except by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the board of supervisors.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20136.

Whenever the board enters into a contract for the erection, construction, alteration, or repair of any public building or other structure, the contract shall not be altered or changed in any manner, except:

(a) As provided in Section 20142.

(b) As provided for in the contract itself, or specifications.

(c) By order adopted by a vote of two-thirds of the board, and the consent of the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20137.

If any change or alteration of the contract is ordered, it shall be specified in writing by a duly authorized officer of the county. The cost of such change or alteration must be agreed upon between the board and the contractor unless the contract includes a provision to determine a fair and equitable price for the change or alteration. Such a provision may provide for any method of determining the price common in commercial transactions, including, but not limited to, arbitration or cost plus a fixed fee. If the cost so agreed upon:

(a) Does not exceed the amounts specified in Sections 20121 and 21031, or

(b) Does not exceed 10 percent of the original contract price, the board may authorize the contractor to proceed with the change or alteration without the formality of obtaining bids therefor.

No change or alteration shall be authorized the amount of which is within the limitation specified in subdivision (b) and in excess of the limitation specified in subdivision (a) except by four-fifths vote of the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20138.

If the cost of the work is reduced by reason of any modification of the contract, compensation shall be made to the county therefor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20139.

The board shall not pay or become liable for any extra work done on, or extra material furnished for, any building or structure in the course of performance of a contract let pursuant to this article except in accordance with Section 20142, unless the contract specifically provides for such payment or the contract is changed or modified in the manner provided for in this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 36.)
-------------------------------------------

20140.

The method of payment for construction contracts shall be determined by the board, including progress payments for completed portions of the work and for materials delivered on the ground or stored subject to the control of the board and unused.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20141.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to the construction of any public building used for facilities of juvenile forestry camps or juvenile homes, ranches or camps established under Article 15 (commencing with Section 880) of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, if a major portion of the construction work is to be performed by wards of the juvenile court assigned to such camps, ranches, or homes.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20142.

(a) The board of supervisors may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the county engineer, or other county officer, to order changes or additions in the work being performed under construction contracts. When so authorized, any change or addition in the work shall be ordered in writing by the county engineer, or other designated officer, and the extra cost to the county for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), nor 10 percent of the amount of any original contract that exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000).

(b) For contracts whose
 original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract cost in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). Notwithstanding subdivisions (c) and (d), no change or alteration shall exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(c) The County of Los Angeles may elect to be subject to all of the following provisions:

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding on the County of Los Angeles, and all existing protest and grievance procedures regarding that decision remain valid.

(4) At the time the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the board shall
 implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision, subdivision (b) of Section 20395, subdivision (e) of Section 20405, subdivision (b) of Section 20614, and subdivision (b) of Section 20998, exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Los Angeles shall provide a review report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee on Governance and Finance no later than July 1, 2026.

(d) The County of Santa Clara may elect to be subject to all of the following provisions:

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million
 dollars ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding on the County of Santa Clara, and all existing protest and grievance procedures
 regarding that decision remain valid.

(4) At the time the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the board shall implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision and subdivision (c) of Section 20395 exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Santa Clara shall provide a review report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee on Governance and Finance no later than July 1, 2026.

(e) This section shall remain in effect
 only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended (as amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 1) by Stats. 2023, Ch. 281, Sec. 1.   (AB 1649)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.    See later operative version added by Sec. 2 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20142.

(a) The board of supervisors may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the county engineer, or other county officer, to order changes or additions in the work being performed under construction contracts. When so authorized, any change or addition in the work shall be ordered in writing by the county engineer, or other designated officer, and the extra cost to the county for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), nor 10 percent of the amount of any original contract that exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars
 ($250,000).

(b) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract cost in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any such change or alteration exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(c) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2027.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 1) and added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 2.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20143.

The board may cause the insertion of provisions in any contract for the erection, construction, alteration, or repair of any public building or structure, or in the specifications therefor, for the performance of such extra work and the furnishing of materials therefor by the contractor as the board, county engineer, or other duly authorized officer requires for the proper completion or construction of the whole work contemplated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20144.

The provisions of this article do not apply to any contract which is entered into between Napa County and the State of California or any agency of the executive department of the State of California, for the alteration or repair of the structure located in Napa County and known as the Old Bale Mill.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20145.

(a) In counties containing a population of 6,000,000 or over, the board of supervisors may by ordinance authorize any county officer as is deemed appropriate to take or perform any or all acts or actions permitted or required of the board by this article, including the authority to adopt and advertise plans and specifications, award contracts, approve bonds, or order the change or alteration of contracts, with respect to original contracts which do not exceed the total amount of three hundred thirty thousand dollars ($330,000) or with respect to changes or alterations to original contracts entered into by the board where the changes or alterations do not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the original
 contract or three hundred thirty thousand dollars ($330,000), whichever is less. The aggregate total amount of those changes or alterations to an original contract may not exceed 25 percent of the amount of the original contract. Any authorization pursuant to this section shall include detailed procedures governing the county officer in the exercise of that authority.

(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove the county’s requirement to follow the applicable provisions of the Public Contract Code as it relates to the advertising of public works projects and award of public works contracts.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 329, Sec. 16.   (SB 780)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

20146.

(a) A county, with approval of the board of supervisors, or a public entity, with approval of its governing body, may utilize construction manager at-risk construction contracts for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any infrastructure, excluding roads, and including, but not limited to, buildings, utility improvements associated with buildings, flood control and underground utility improvements, and bridges, owned or leased by the county. A construction manager at-risk construction contract may be used only for projects in the county in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000) and may be awarded using either the lowest responsible bidder or best value method to a construction manager at-risk entity that possesses or that obtains sufficient bonding to cover the contract amount for construction
 services and risk and liability insurance as may be required by the county or public entity. Any payment or performance bond written for the purposes of this section shall be written using a bond form developed by the county or public entity.

(b) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

(1) “Best value” means a value determined by objective criteria related to the experience of the entity and project personnel, project plan, financial strength of the entity, safety record of the entity, and price.

(2) “Construction manager at-risk contract” means a competitively procured contract by a county or public entity with an individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other recognized legal entity, that is appropriately licensed in this state, including a contractor’s license issued by the
 Contractors’ State License Board, and that guarantees the cost of a project and furnishes construction management services, including, but not limited to, preparation and coordination of bid packages, scheduling, cost control, value engineering, evaluation, preconstruction services, and construction administration.

(3) “Public entity” means a public entity of which the members of the county board of supervisors make up the members of the governing body of that public entity.

(c) (1) A construction manager at-risk entity shall not be prequalified or shortlisted or awarded a contract unless that entity provides an enforceable commitment to the county or public entity that the construction manager at-risk entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an
 apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following conditions are met:

(A) The county or public entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the construction manager at-risk entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the county or public entity before January 1, 2018.

(C) The construction manager at-risk entity has
 entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(d) Subcontractors that were not listed by a construction manager at-risk entity as partners, general partners, or association members in a partnership, limited partnership, or association in the entity’s construction manager at-risk bid submission shall be awarded by the construction manager at-risk entity in accordance with the process set forth by the county. All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this section shall be afforded the protections contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1. The construction manager at-risk entity
 shall do both of the following:

(1) Provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the county or public entity.

(2) Provide a fixed date and time on which the subcontracted work will be awarded in accordance with the procedure established pursuant to this section.

(e) A county or public entity that elects to proceed under this section and uses a construction manager at-risk contract for a building project shall make a copy of the contract available for public inspection on its internet website and notify the appropriate policy committees of the Legislature with instructions on finding and accessing the stored contract.

(f) (1) If the county or public entity elects to award a project pursuant to this section, retention proceeds withheld by the county or public entity from the construction manager at-risk entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond issued by an admitted surety insurer is required in the solicitation of bids.

(2) In a contract between the construction manager at-risk entity and any subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the county or public entity and the construction manager at-risk entity. If the construction manager at-risk entity provides written notice to any subcontractor that is not a member of the construction manager at-risk entity, before or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently
 is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the construction manager at-risk entity, then the construction manager at-risk entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the county or public entity and the construction manager at-risk entity from any payment made by the construction manager at-risk entity to the subcontractor.

(g) If the county or public entity elects to award a project pursuant to this section, the contract between the county or public entity and the construction manager at-risk entity shall be subject to subdivision (b) of Section 2782 of the Civil Code. Any contract between the construction manager at-risk entity and a contractor or subcontractor shall be subject to Section 2782.05 of the Civil Code.

(h) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2029, and as of that date is
 repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 131, Sec. 167.   (AB 1754)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20147.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, this article shall not apply to a contract entered into by the County of San Diego with a private entity for the delivery of a regional communications system and any related infrastructure to be used by public safety agencies and emergency responders located in the Counties of Imperial and San Diego.

(b) The County of San Diego may use any competitive procurement method to procure the regional communications systems and related infrastructure described in subdivision (a), provided that if the County of San Diego does not use a procurement method otherwise available to it under this article, the procurement shall be a best value procurement. “Best value” means a value
 determined by evaluation of objective criteria related to price, functional specifications and features, technical specifications and features, implementation plan, life-cycle costs and support, experience, past performance, and fiscal stability. A best value determination may entail selection of the lowest priced technically acceptable proposal or selection of the best proposal for a fixed price established by the procuring agency, or it may consist of a tradeoff between price and other specified factors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 45, Sec. 1.   (AB 2149)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3.6. Counties of 500,000 or Less Population [20150. - 20150.14.]

20150.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by counties of 500,000 or less population as provided for in Part 2 (commencing with Section 25000) of Division 2 of Title 3 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.1.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, except as provided in subdivision (b) or (c), every county, whether general law or charter, containing a population of less than 500,000 shall employ bidding procedures on public projects as provided in this article. This article shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. In the event of conflict with any other provision of law relative to bidding procedures, the provisions of this article shall apply.

(b) Every county, whether general law or charter, containing a population of less than 500,000 is authorized to participate in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000) of Part 3 of
 Division 2.

(c) A county, whether general law or charter, containing a population of less than 500,000 may award individual annual contracts as provided in Section 20128.5.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 22.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.2.

As used in this article, “public project” means:

(a) A project for the erection, improvement, and repair of public buildings and works.

(b) Work in or about streams, bays, waterfronts, embankments, or other work for protection against overflow, except maintenance, repair, or reconstruction work.

(c) Supplies and materials used in maintenance, repair, or reconstruction work in or about streams, bays, waterfronts, embankments; or other maintenance, repair, or reconstruction work for protection against overflow.

The provisions of this article shall not change existing law regarding inclusion or exclusion of labor or materials used for completion of the project.

Except for the erection, improvement and repair of public buildings, the construction of dams, reservoirs, powerplants and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher, nothing in this article shall apply to a publicly owned water, power or waste disposal system.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.3.

Expenditures for public projects shall not include the costs of:

(a) Equipment, supplies and materials acquired by a public agency to enable the timely completion of a public project as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 20150.2 let to a contractor.

(b) Plans, specifications, engineering and advertising required for public projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.4.

Public projects between four thousand dollars ($4,000) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be let to contract by informal or formal bidding procedures.

Public projects of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and more shall, in all instances, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.5.

Each county shall adopt ordinances or regulations providing for formal and informal bidding procedures as required by this article for public projects conducted by such county.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.6.

Ordinances or regulations establishing informal bidding procedures shall provide that the county shall, as soon as is practicable after the time for the renewal of contractors’ licenses, notify each contractor of the county of the opportunity to register with the county to be subsequently notified of informal bidding proceedings. The list of such contractors shall be a public record.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.7.

The notice inviting informal bids shall be by published notice and may, in addition, be supplemented by mailed notice to contractors registered pursuant to Section 20150.6. The county may cause the notice to be printed as display advertising in such form and style as it deems appropriate. The notice shall describe in general terms the project to be done and state a closing date for submission of such informal bids. Publication of notice pursuant to this section shall be in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published within the jurisdiction of the county, or, if there is no such newspaper within the jurisdiction of the county, publication shall be made in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated in the jurisdiction of the county, or, if there is no such publication, the notice shall be posted in at least three public places within the jurisdiction of the county as have been designated by ordinance or regulation of such county as places for the posting of its notices. Notice shall be published in accordance with Section 6061 of the Government Code and shall be completed at least 24 hours before the time scheduled for opening of the bids.

In addition to notice published in a newspaper of general circulation, mailed, or posted, pursuant to this section, the county may also publish notice inviting bids in a trade publication.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.8.

The notices inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly state the project to be done. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the jurisdiction of the county, or, if there is no such newspaper within the jurisdiction of the county, publication shall be made in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated in the jurisdiction of the county, or, if there is no such publication, the notice shall be posted in at least three public places within the jurisdiction of the county as have been designated by ordinance or regulation of such county as places for the posting of its notices.

In addition to notice published in a newspaper of general circulation, mailed, or posted, pursuant to this section, the county may also publish notice inviting bids in a trade publication.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.9.

In its discretion, the county may reject any bids presented. If, after the first invitation for bids, all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the county shall abandon the project or shall readvertise for bids in the manner prescribed by this article. If after readvertising, the county rejects all bids presented, the county may proceed with the project by use of county personnel or may readvertise. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the county may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the county may have the project done without further complying with this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.10.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 20150.9, on any project which is less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000), if, after the first invitation for bids, all bids are rejected, the county may, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its board of supervisors declaring that the project can be performed more economically by county personnel, or that in its opinion a contract to perform the project can be negotiated with the original bidders at a lower price than that in any of the bids, or the materials or supplies furnished at a lower price in the open market. Upon adoption of the resolution, it may have the project done in the manner stated without further complying with this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 694, Sec. 12.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.11.

It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any public project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring public projects to be done by contract after bidding. Every person who willfully violates this provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.12.

The board of supervisors of the county shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all public projects the expenditure for which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.13.

All bidders on public projects which exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in cost, shall be afforded the opportunity to examine the plans, specifications, and working details for the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------

20150.14.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to the construction of any public building used for facilities of juvenile forestry camps or juvenile homes, ranches, or camps established under Article 15 (commencing with Section 880) of Chapter 2, Part 1, Division 2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, if a major portion of the construction work is to be performed by wards of the juvenile court assigned to such camps, ranches, or homes; or to public projects employing prisoners pursuant to Section 25359 of the Government Code and public projects involving persons engaged in federal, state, or county job or work training programs.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 82.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3.7. Best Value Construction Contracting for Counties [20155. - 20155.9.]

20155.

(a) This article provides for a best value procurement program for county construction projects in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000).

(b) The board of supervisors of a county shall let any contract for a construction project pursuant to this article to the bidder representing the best value or else reject all bids.

(c) The bidder may be selected on the basis of the best value to the county. In order to implement this method of selection, the board of supervisors shall adopt and publish procedures and required criteria that ensure that all selections are conducted in a fair and impartial manner. These
 procedures shall conform to Sections 20155.3 to 20155.6, inclusive, and shall be mandatory for a county that chooses to participate in the pilot program.

(d) If the board of supervisors of a county deems it to be in the best interest of the county, the board of supervisors, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder for a project to execute a tendered contract, may award it to the bidder with the second lowest best value score, as determined in accordance with subdivision (c) of Section 20155.5. If the second bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the board of supervisors may likewise award it to the bidder with the third lowest best value score, as determined in accordance with subdivision (c) of Section 20155.5.

(e) (1) A county may also use the best value
 construction contracting method set out in this article to award individual annual contracts, which shall not exceed three million dollars ($3,000,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index, for repair, remodeling, or other repetitive work to be done according to unit prices. The contracts shall be based on plans and specifications for typical work. No annual contracts may be awarded for any new construction.

(2) For purposes of this subdivision, best value criteria shall be applied to the annual contract for construction services, rather than to an individual, specific project. Annual contracts may be extended or renewed for two subsequent annual terms and a maximum of six million dollars ($6,000,000) over the subsequent two terms of the contract. Contract values shall be adjusted annually
 to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “unit price” means the amount paid for a single unit of an item of work, and “typical work” means a work description applicable universally or applicable to a large number of individual projects, as distinguished from work specifically described with respect to an individual project. For purposes of this section, “repair, remodeling, or other repetitive work to be done according to unit prices” shall not include design or contract drawings.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 58, Sec. 2.   (AB 1957)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.1.

As used in this article:

(a) “Best value” means a procurement process whereby the selected bidder may be selected on the basis of objective criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders with the resulting selection representing the best combination of price and qualifications.

(b) “Best value contract” means a competitively bid contract entered into pursuant to this article.

(c) “Best value contractor” means a properly licensed person, firm, or corporation that submits a bid for, or is awarded, a best value contract.

(d) “County” means any chartered or general law county. “County” includes a city and county.

(e) “Demonstrated management competency” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity of the proposed management staffing to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity.

(f) “Financial condition” means the financial resources needed to perform the contract. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s financial condition shall include, at a minimum, capacity to obtain all required payment bonds, performance bonds, and liability insurance.

(g) “Labor compliance” means the ability to comply with, and past performance with, contract and statutory requirements for the payment of wages and
 qualifications of the workforce. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s labor compliance shall include, as a minimum, the bidder’s ability to comply with the apprenticeship requirements of the California Apprenticeship Council and the Department of Industrial Relations, its past conformance with those requirements, and its past conformance with requirements to pay prevailing wages on public works projects.

(h) “Qualifications” means the financial condition, relevant experience, demonstrated management competency, labor compliance, and safety record of the bidder, and, if required by the bidding documents, some or all of the preceding qualifications as they pertain to subcontractors proposed to be used by the bidder for designated portions of the work. A county shall evaluate financial condition, relevant experience, demonstrated management competency,
 labor compliance, and safety record, using, to the extent possible, quantifiable measurements.

(i) “Relevant experience” means the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity.

(j) “Safety record” means the prior history concerning the safe performance of construction contracts. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s safety record shall include, at a minimum, its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 58, Sec. 3.   (AB 1957)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.2.

(a) If a county as defined by Section 20155.1 is also responsible for delivery of a project included in Item 2660-110-0042 of Section 2.00 of the Budget Act of 2016, as amended by Chapter 7 of the Statutes of 2017, that county may utilize the “cost-plus-time” bidding procedure, also known as “A+B Bidding,” under this chapter for any of the projects specified in that budget item.

(b) “Cost-plus-time bidding” means a competitive procurement process that uses a cost parameter (A) and a time parameter (B) to determine a bid value.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 20, Sec. 7.   (AB 115)   Effective June 27, 2017.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.3.

A county shall proceed in accordance with the following when awarding best value contracts under this article:

(a) The county shall not select a bidder on the basis of the best value to a county unless, after evaluating at a public meeting the alternative of awarding the contract on the basis of the lowest bid price, the county makes a written finding that awarding the contract on the basis of best value, for the specific project under consideration, will accomplish one or more of the following objectives: reducing project costs, expediting the completion of the project, or providing features not achievable through awarding the contract on the basis of the lowest bid price.

(b) The county shall prepare a solicitation for bids and give notice pursuant to Section 20125. A county may identify specific types of subcontractors that are required to be included in the bids. A county shall comply with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 with regard to construction subcontractors identified in the bid.

(c) The county shall establish a procedure to prequalify bidders pursuant to Section 20101. The information required pursuant to this section shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information submitted by the bidder as part of the evaluation process shall not be open to public inspection to the extent that information is exempt from disclosure under the California Public
 Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code).

(d) Each solicitation for bids shall do all of the following:

(1) Invite prequalified bidders to submit sealed bids in the manner prescribed by this article.

(2) Include a section identifying and describing the following:

(A) Criteria that the county will consider in evaluating bids.

(B) The methodology and rating or weighting system that will be used by the county in evaluating bids.

(C) The relative importance or weight assigned to the criteria identified
 in the request for bids.

(e) Final evaluation of the best value contractor shall be done in a manner that prevents cost or price information from being revealed to the committee evaluating the qualifications of the bidders prior to completion and announcement of that committee’s decision.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 362.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.4.

(a) A best value contractor shall not be prequalified or shortlisted unless the contractor provides an enforceable commitment to the county that the contractor and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(b) This section shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(1) The county has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or
 contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the contractor agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(2) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the county prior to January 1, 2017.

(3) The contractor has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the contractor and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(c) For purposes of this section, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2016, Ch. 774, Sec. 9.   (SB 693)   Effective January 1, 2017.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.5.

Selection of the best value contractor shall be made as follows:

(a) (1) An evaluation committee appointed by the county shall evaluate the qualifications of the bidders based solely upon the criteria set forth in the solicitation documents, and shall assign a qualifications score to each bid.

(2) A county shall establish written policies and procedures, consistent with applicable law, to ensure that members of an evaluation committee are free from conflicts of interest, if the county has not already established applicable written policies and procedures.

(b) A county shall not award a contract for a construction project pursuant to this article if a solicitation for bids for that construction project results in the submission of fewer than three responsive bids to the county for evaluation. 

(c) Except as provided in subdivision (d) of Section 20155, the award of the contract shall be made to the bidder whose bid is determined by a county, in writing, to be the best value to the county. To determine the best value contractor, the county shall divide each bidder’s price by its qualifications score. The lowest resulting cost per quality point will represent the best value bid.

(d) A county shall issue a written decision of its contract award.

(e) Upon issuance of a contract
 award, a county shall publicly announce its award identifying the best value contractor to which the award is made, the project, the project price, and the selected best value contractor’s score based on the evaluation criteria listed in the request for bids. The notice of award shall be made public and include the score of the selected best value contractor in relation to all other responsive bidders and their respective prices. The contract file shall include documentation sufficient to support the decision to award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 627, Sec. 2.   (SB 762)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.6.

(a) If a county elects to award a project pursuant to this article, retention proceeds withheld by the county from the selected best value contractor shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(b) In a contract between the selected best value contractor and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the county and the selected best value contractor. If the selected best value contractor provides written
 notice to a subcontractor that, prior to or at the time the bid is requested, a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the selected best value contractor, then the selected best value contractor may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the county and the selected best value contractor from any payment made by the selected best value contractor to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 627, Sec. 2.   (SB 762)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.7.

(a) Before March 1, 2029, the board of supervisors of a participating county shall submit a report to the appropriate policy committees of the Legislature and the Joint Legislative Budget Committee. The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

(1) A description of the projects awarded using the best value procedures.

(2) The contract award amounts.

(3) The best value contractors awarded the projects.

(4) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, or award of the best value contracts, including the resolution of the protests.

(5) A description of the prequalification process.

(6) The criteria used to evaluate the bids, including the weighting of the criteria and an assessment of the effectiveness of the methodology.

(7) If a project awarded under this article has been completed, an assessment of the project performance, to include a summary of any delays or cost increases.

(b) A report submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 58, Sec. 4.   (AB 1957)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.8.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article is not intended to change in any manner any guideline, criteria, procedure, or requirement of a county to let any contract for a project to the lowest responsible bidder or else reject all bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 627, Sec. 2.   (SB 762)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 20155.9.)
-------------------------------------------

20155.9.

This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 58, Sec. 5.   (AB 1957)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.    Note: Repeal affects Article 3.7, commencing with Section 20155.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4. Cities [20160. - 20175.]

20160.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts awarded by cities subject to Title 4 (commencing with Section 34000) of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20161.

As used in this chapter, “public project” means:

(a) A project for the erection, improvement, painting, or repair of public buildings and works.

(b) Work in or about streams, bays, waterfronts, embankments, or other work for protection against overflow.

(c) Street or sewer work except maintenance or repair.

(d) Furnishing supplies or materials for any such project, including maintenance or repair of streets or sewers.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20162.

When the expenditure required for a public project exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20163.

It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any public work project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring public work to be done by contract after competitive bidding. Every person who willfully violates this provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20164.

The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices. The notice shall distinctly state the project to be done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20165.

Any notice inviting bids, which specifies locations of possible materials, such as a borrow pit or gravel bed, for use in the proposed construction project which would be subject to Section 1602 of the Fish and Game Code, shall include any conditions or modifications established pursuant to Section 1603 of the Fish and Game Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 383, Sec. 10.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

20166.

In its discretion, the legislative body may reject any bids presented and readvertise. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the legislative body may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the legislative body may have the project done without further complying with this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20167.

After rejecting bids, the legislative body may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members declaring that the project can be performed more economically by day labor, or the materials or supplies furnished at a lower price in the open market. Upon adoption of the resolution, it may have the project done in the manner stated without further complying with this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20168.

In case of an emergency, the legislative body may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property. Upon adoption of the resolution, it may expend any sum required in the emergency without complying with this chapter. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the legislative body shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 1.2.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20168.5.

In any city that has agreed to permit the transfer of prisoners or parole violators under Section 2910 or 2910.5 of the Penal Code, or of wards under Section 1753.3 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, the city council may contract for the construction or expansion of facilities to be used for that purpose without the formality of obtaining bids, adopting plans and specifications, or complying with other requirements of this article, except as required by this section. The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond for faithful performance. The award of the contract shall be made after a public hearing on the basis of a request for proposals advertised in accordance with Section 6062 or 6062a of the Government Code. The contract may be awarded only to a contractor who has responded to the request for proposals and who is licensed to do the work in accordance with Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. The contract shall be upon terms which the city council determines are necessary for the expeditious completion of the work. A contract shall not be entered into unless at least three proposals to do the work have been evaluated by a competitive process established by the city council and the lowest bid is selected.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1450, Sec. 10.)
-------------------------------------------

20169.

Annually before the beginning of the fiscal year, in cities where there is more than one newspaper of general circulation printed and published, the legislative body shall publish a notice inviting bids and contract for the publication of legal notices required to be published in such a newspaper. The contract shall include the printing and publishing of all such legal notices during the fiscal year.

If there is only one such newspaper, the legislative body may contract with it without advertising for bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20170.

All bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) Cashier’s check made payable to the city.

(c) A certified check made payable to the city.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20171.

The security shall be in an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the amount bid. A bid shall not be considered unless one of the forms of bidder’s security is enclosed with it.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20172.

If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract, the amount of the bidder’s security shall be forfeited to the city except as hereinafter provided.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20173.

The cash or proceeds shall be deposited in the fund out of which the expenses of preparation and printing of the plans and specifications, estimates of cost, and publication of notice are paid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20174.

The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the legislative body awards the contract to the second lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder if cash or a check is used, or to the surety on the bidder’s bond if a bond is used.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20175.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, the City of Elk Grove, with approval of the city council, may utilize construction manager at-risk construction contracts for the city’s zoo project. A construction manager at-risk construction contract may be awarded using either the lowest responsible bidder or best value method to a construction manager at-risk entity that possesses or that obtains sufficient bonding to cover the contract amount for construction services and risk and liability insurance as may be required by the city. Any payment or performance bond written for the purposes of this section shall be written using a bond form developed by the city.

(b) (1) A construction manager at-risk entity shall not be prequalified or
 shortlisted or awarded a contract unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the city that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the zoo project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following conditions are met:

(A) The city has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the City of Elk Grove Community
 Workforce and Training Agreement executed in January 2023, or an extension or renewal of that agreement.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(c) Subcontractors that were not listed by a construction manager at-risk entity as partners, general partners, or association members in a partnership, limited partnership, or association in the entity’s construction manager at-risk bid submission shall be awarded by the construction manager at-risk entity in accordance with the process set forth by the city. All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this section shall be afforded the protections contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1. The construction manager at-risk entity shall do both of the
 following:

(1) Provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the city.

(2) Provide a fixed date and time on which the subcontracted work will be awarded in accordance with the procedure established pursuant to this section.

(d) If the city elects to proceed under this section and uses a construction manager at-risk contract for a construction project, it shall make a copy of the contract available for public inspection on its internet website.

(e) (1) If the city elects to award a project pursuant to this section, retention proceeds withheld by the city from the construction manager at-risk entity shall not
 exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond issued by an admitted surety insurer is required in the solicitation of bids.

(2) In a contract between the construction manager at-risk entity and any subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the city and the construction manager at-risk entity. If the construction manager at-risk entity provides written notice to any subcontractor that is not a member of the construction manager at-risk entity, before or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required, and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the construction manager at-risk entity, then the construction manager at-risk entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the city
 and the construction manager at-risk entity from any payment made by the construction manager at-risk entity to the subcontractor.

(f) As used in this section:

(1) “Best value” means a value determined by objective criteria related to the experience of the entity and project personnel, project plan, financial strength of the entity, safety record of the entity, and price.

(2) “City” means the City of Elk Grove.

(3) “Construction manager at-risk contract” means one or a successive combination of competitively procured contracts entered into by the city with an individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other recognized legal entity, that is appropriately licensed in this state, including holding a contractor’s license issued by the
 Contractors State License Board, and that guarantees the cost of a project and furnishes construction management services, including, but not limited to, preparation and coordination of bid packages, scheduling, cost control, value engineering, evaluation, preconstruction services, and construction administration.

(4) “Project labor agreement” means a prehire collective bargaining agreement covering employees in the building and construction industry that establishes terms and conditions of employment for the project or contract.

(5) “Zoo project” or “project” means the new zoo proposed to be relocated from the City of Sacramento and constructed over time, with buildings, including repair of structures, landscaping, habitat, site work, and flatwork, in the City of Elk Grove and its associated public infrastructure, including, but not limited to, roadway in the vicinity of the new
 zoo, excluding any roadway owned and maintained by the State of California through the Department of Transportation, and utility improvements in any way associated with the new zoo.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 593, Sec. 1.   (SB 739)   Effective September 25, 2024.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 4.5. Local Agencies—Earthquake Relief [20185. - 20189.]

20185.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts awarded by local agencies for earthquake relief subject to Article 5 (commencing with Section 54125) of Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20186.

Any resolution authorizing bonds may provide that the bonds may recite that it is issued pursuant to this chapter and bonds containing such recital are conclusively deemed valid and issued in conformity with this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20187.

Reference on the face of bonds to the resolution by its date of adoption incorporates the resolution and of this chapter the bonds and their coupons.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20188.

Each taker and subsequent holder of the bonds and attached or detached coupons has recourse to all of the provisions of the resolution and of this chapter and is bound by their terms.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20189.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the local agency.

(c) A certified check made payable to the local agency.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the local agency.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the local agency beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 6.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 5. Municipal Utility Districts [20190. - 20192.]

20190.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts subject to the Municipal Utility District Act provided for in Division 6 (commencing with Section 11501) of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20191.

Any district operating utility works may accept, without limitation by any other provisions of this division requiring approval of indebtedness, loans from any person, firm, or corporation for the purpose of financing the construction of office buildings, warehouses, and garages for the district, and the acquisition of sites therefor, with appurtenances necessary or convenient thereto. The evidence of the district’s indebtedness shall constitute a negotiable instrument.

As used in this section, “construction” includes the meaning of “reconstruction,” “repair,” “improve,” “remodeling,” “rehabilitation,’ ’ and “completion.”

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20192.

(a) Whenever the cost of construction of any office building, warehouse, or garage of the district constructed under Section 20191 exceeds the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000), the district shall adopt plans and specifications and working details, as may be proper, and shall advertise for bids for the work in accordance with the plans and specifications so adopted. All bidders shall be afforded an opportunity to examine the plans and specifications and the district shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(b) All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(3) A certified check made payable to the district.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(c) The person or corporation to whom the contract is awarded shall be required to execute a bond for the faithful performance of the contract. The form of the bond shall be approved by the board of directors. In cases of great emergency and when necessary to protect life and property, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may without advertising for bids therefor, have the work done by day labor.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 7.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6. Public Utility Districts [20200. - 20201.5.]

20200.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts subject to the Public Utility District Act provided for in Division 7 (commencing with Section 15501) of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 23.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

20201.

Every complete project for new construction or project for any alteration, maintenance, or repair, if the costs of materials, supplies and labor exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder. The board shall adopt plans and specifications, strain sheets, and working details and shall advertise for bids for the project in accordance with the plans and specifications so adopted. Notice inviting bids for all projects shall be published in a newspaper in the district at least one week prior to the time specified for receiving bids.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20201.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 8.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.5. Public Utility Districts [20202.1. - 20207.7.]

20202.1.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by public utility districts as provided for in the Public Utility District Act pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 15501) of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20202.2.

A district may make contracts, employ labor, and do all acts necessary and convenient for the full exercise of its powers.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20204.1.

All bidders shall be afforded an opportunity to examine such plans and specifications, and the board shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. The plans and specifications adopted shall be attached to and become part of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20204.2.

The person or corporation to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond, to be approved by the board, for the faithful performance of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20204.3.

All bids for construction work submitted pursuant to this article shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 9.)
-------------------------------------------

20205.1.

In case of an emergency, the board shall respond to the emergency pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050) if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 1.4.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20205.2.

Nothing in this article prohibits the board from doing or causing to be done directly by the district, and without any contract, any or all work necessary or proper in or about the making of all current and ordinary repairs or in or about current and ordinary upkeep or maintenance.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.1.

Upon the determination of the board by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members that all bids submitted are unsatisfactory or are excessive, the district may do any necessary and proper work and make any necessary and proper expenditures in lieu of contracting for the performance of such proposed work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.2.

Plans and specifications when once adopted shall not be altered or changed in any manner whereby the cost of the proposed work is increased, except by a majority vote of the board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1991, Ch. 1226, Sec. 16.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.3.

A contract made under this article shall not be altered or changed in any manner, except when first ordered by a vote of two-thirds of the board, and with the consent of the contractor. The particular change or alteration shall be specified in writing and its cost agreed upon between the board and the contractor. In no case shall the board pay or become liable to pay for any extra work done or extra material furnished.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.4.

Except as otherwise provided in this article, the board may annually advertise for sealed bids for furnishing the district with goods, merchandise, stores, subsistence, printing, materials, and all other supplies, and advertising. The advertisement shall be published pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code in the county in which the greater part of the district is situated.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.5.

All bids shall be upon a schedule prepared by the clerk, showing all articles needed by the district and its several offices and stating separately the price of each article to be furnished. Any person may bid upon any article separately.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.6.

Notices of proposals for furnishing articles shall mention the articles in general and shall state that the conditions and schedule may be found in the office of the clerk of the district and that the articles are to be delivered at such times, in such quantities, and in such manner as the board may designate.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20206.9.

The clerk shall furnish printed blanks for all proposals and contracts.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1993, Ch. 1195, Sec. 25.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.1.

In considering bids the board may accept or reject all or any of them, or may accept or reject part of a bid, preference being given to the lowest responsible bidder. The award as to each article shall in all cases be made to the lowest bidder for such article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.2.

All supplies furnished the district or its officers shall be furnished at a price no greater than is specified in the bid accepted by the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.3.

All bids shall be opened by the board at an hour and place to be stated in the advertisements for proposals, in the presence of all bidders who attend, and the bidders may inspect the bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.4.

All contracts shall be made with the lowest responsible bidder. Bidders for construction contracts shall give bonds for the faithful performance of the construction contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1991, Ch. 1226, Sec. 17.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.5.

“Advertising” means the advertising and publication of all official reports, orders, ordinances, resolutions, notices inviting proposals, and all notices of every nature relating to work or business of the district. Advertising shall not be classified. No part or kind of advertising shall be charged or contracted for at a higher rate than any other part or kind is charged or contracted for, except in the case of the delinquent tax list. The advertising of the delinquent tax list shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder on a separate bidding from all other advertising. A square of advertising shall be 234 ems nonpareil.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.6.

No officer or employee of the district shall order any article or make any publication which is not expressly authorized by this division or by the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 83.)
-------------------------------------------

20207.7.

Unless the amount involved in the purchase at any one time of any articles for which no contract has been entered into exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), the board may purchase the articles without the necessity of advertising or letting contracts. Where the cost of any articles for which no contract has been entered into exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), the board shall advertise for sealed bids for furnishing the district the articles. In the matter of advertising, opening and accepting bids, and the letting of contracts, the board shall proceed in all respects in the manner and form provided in the case of contracts for annual supplies.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1414, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 6.7. Transit Districts [20209. - 20209.]

20209.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any transit district may negotiate the purchase from, or the sale to, any federal, state, or local public agency of any real or personal property upon terms and conditions agreed to by the district and the public agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1198, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7. Transit Districts—Alameda and Contra Costa Counties [20210. - 20214.]

20210.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by transit districts in the counties of Alameda or Contra Costa, as provided for in Part 1 (commencing with Section 24501) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20211.

(a) The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder, or, in the district’s discretion, to the responsible bidder who submitted a proposal that provides the best value to the district on the basis of the factors identified in the solicitation. “Best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit in response to the requirements described in the solicitation documents. 

(b) To the extent practicable, the district shall obtain a minimum of three
 quotations, either written or oral, that permit prices and terms to be compared whenever the expected expenditure required for the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). 

(c) The construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. 

(d) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and on the district’s procurement Internet Web
 site, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 408, Sec. 1.   (AB 116)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

20212.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by a four-fifths vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20213.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 1.7.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20214.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 10.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 7.5. Transportation Agencies [20216. - 20217.]

20216.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any contract by the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District, the Southern California Rapid Transit District, the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District, the Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit District, the San Diego Metropolitan Transit Development Board, the North San Diego County Transit Development Board, a county transportation commission that is subject to the competitive negotiation provisions of Section 20229.1, 20231.5, or 20916.3 of this code, or Section 120224.4, 125228, or 130238 of the Public Utilities Code, a transit district, city, county, city and county, or transportation agency, that is subject to the competitive negotiation provisions of Section 20217, and any other transportation agency that is authorized to use comparable competitive negotiation provisions after July 1, 1992, shall comply with the requirements of this section.

(b) Other than proprietary information, the content of any request for proposal, any proposal received, and any other communications between a transportation agency and a potential bidder on a contract that is subject to subdivision (a) shall be made available to the public no later than the same time that a recommendation for awarding a contract is made to the governing board or persons responsible for approving the award of a contract to a bidder, except that the price proposed in any bidder’s initial proposal shall be available upon the opening of the bid by the agency requesting the proposal.

(c) No person may participate in the evaluation of any proposal for the award of a contract that is subject to subdivision (a) if any of the following conditions apply:

(1) The person has a financial interest in the outcome of the evaluation or the contract.

(2) The person has received a gift of over two hundred fifty dollars ($250) during the previous 12 months from a bidder directly, or indirectly through an intermediary, if it is known to the person that the gift was in whole or in part funded by the bidder.

(d) The agency board or any person responsible for awarding a contract under this article shall not have any ex parte communication with a bidder or any representative of the bidder except in writing and if the communication is made public.

(e) A contract may not be awarded until 15 days after the staff recommendation has been made available to the public.

(f) An agency using the competitive negotiation process shall maintain in writing, and make available upon request, a complete description of the process and the policies and procedures used by the agency in doing so, including all standards, criteria, public protest procedures, and method of contract award. The agency shall also keep a complete record of its actions on each procurement.

(g) For purposes of this section and Sections 20217, 20229.1, 20231.5, and 20916.3 of this code and Sections 120224.4 and 130238 of the Public Utilities Code, “competitive negotiation” means a procurement process used by an agency in lieu of a competitive sealed bid process when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids, and that permits the consideration of price, technical experience, past performance, management, or other factors in selecting the most cost-effective proposal for the manufacture and delivery of specified goods, transit vehicles, or equipment. The process includes negotiations with manufacturers or providers after the receipt of initial proposals during which performance or technical standards and other criteria may be revised in order to secure proposals most advantageous to the purchasing agency or to cure any deficiencies contained in the original proposals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20217.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the award of purchase contracts by transit agencies under competitive bid procedures may not be feasible for products and materials that are undergoing rapid technological changes or for the introduction of new technologies into agency operations, and that in these circumstances it is in the public interest to consider the broadest possible range of competing products and materials available, fitness of purpose, manufacturer’s warranty, vendor financing, performance reliability, standardization, life cycle costs, delivery timetables, support logistics, and other similar factors in addition to price in the award of these contracts.

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the governing board of a transit district, city, county, city and county, or transportation agency may direct the purchase of (1) computers, telecommunications equipment, fare collection equipment, radio and microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus used in transit operations ; (2) specialized rail transit equipment, including, but not limited to, railcars; (3) buses; and (4) passenger ferries, by competitive negotiation upon a finding by two-thirds vote of all members of the board that the purchase of those products or materials in compliance with provisions of this code generally applicable to the purchase does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the agency’s needs. This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(c) Competitive negotiation, for the purposes of this section includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

(1) A request for proposals shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the agency in its discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, a notice of the request for proposals shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which shall be made at least 10 days before the date for receipt of the proposals. The agency shall make reasonable efforts to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources, and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposal is received.

(2) The request for proposals shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The agency shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award.

(4) Prior to making an award, the agency shall prepare a price analysis and shall find that the final negotiated price is fair and reasonable based upon comparable procurement in the marketplace.

(5) The award shall be made to the qualified proposer whose proposal will be most advantageous to the agency with price and other factors considered. If the award is not made to the proposer whose proposal contains the lowest price, the agency shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(d) The agency may reject any and all proposals and issue a new request for proposals at its discretion.

(e) Upon making an award to a qualified proposer, the agency, upon request, shall make available to all other proposers and to the public, an analysis of the award that provides the basis for the selection of that particular qualified proposal.

(f) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal, may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section pursuant to protest procedures established by the board as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposals shall be filed with the agency within 10 calendar days after the request for proposals is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (c). The agency shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the agency within 15 calendar days after the staff recommendation for award has been made available to the public as required by subdivision (e) of Section 20216.

(2) Any bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the agency within 15 calendar days after the staff recommendation for award has been made available to the public as required by subdivision (e) of Section 20216.

(3) Any protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protesters shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the agency prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, or prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals.

(g) Provisions in any contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, which are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder. 

(h) As used in this section, “agency” includes a transit district, city, county, city and county, or transportation agency when engaged in transit operations.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 101, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 8. San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District [20220. - 20229.1.]

20220.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District, as provided for in Part 2 (commencing with Section 28500) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20221.

(a) The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials when the expenditure required exceeds one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder or, in the district’s discretion, to the responsible bidder who submitted a proposal that provides the best value to the district on the basis of the factors identified in the solicitation. “Best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit in response to requirements described in the solicitation documents. The construction of facilities and works when the expenditure required exceeds
 ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. This publication shall be made at least 10 days before the bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(b) Whenever the expected procurement required exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000) and, in the case of the construction of facilities and works, does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or, in the case of the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials, does not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000), the district shall obtain a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, that permit prices and terms to be compared.

(c) Where the expenditure required by the bid price is less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), the general manager may act for the board. When acting pursuant to this subdivision, the general manager shall, in each instance, promptly notify the board of the action taken.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2016, Ch. 143, Sec. 1.   (AB 2030)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

20221.1.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the governing board of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District may, at its discretion, elect to design and construct all or any part of the extension of the district’s transit facilities to the San Francisco International Airport. If the board elects to design and construct the project, it shall comply with all of the following procurement procedures:

(a) A request for qualifications shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of sources, as determined by the district, in its discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of that portion of the extension the district has elected to design and construct in accordance with this section. In addition, notice of the request for qualifications shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be at least 10 days before responses to the request for qualifications are received. The request for qualifications shall identify the minimum standards that the district has determined, in its discretion, shall be met or exceeded by a contractor to successfully design and construct the project described in this section. Those standards may include, but are not limited to, technical experience and capability, financial condition and capacity, organization, and personnel.

(b) All respondents determined by the district to meet or exceed the minimum standards set forth in the request for qualifications shall be considered prequalified. The district may, in its discretion, repeat the prequalification process described in subdivision (a). If the district has prequalified at least three respondents, it may invite those prequalified to submit sealed bids for the project based upon plans and specifications prepared by the district. Only those who have been prequalified are eligible for award of a contract. Award shall be made to the prequalified bidder submitting the lowest responsive bid.

(c) The board may reject any and all bids and request new bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 988, Sec. 1.   Effective September 29, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

20222.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by a two-thirds vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20223.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 1.8.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20224.

Upon determining that immediate remedial measures to avert or alleviate damage to property, or to repair or restore damaged or destroyed property, of the district are necessary in order to insure that the facilities of the district are available to serve the transportation needs of the general public, and upon determining that available remedial measures, including procurement in compliance with Sections 20221, 20222, and 20223, are inadequate, the general manager may authorize the expenditure of money previously appropriated specifically by the board for the direct purchases of goods and services, without observance of the provisions of those sections.

The general manager shall, after any such expenditure, submit to the board a full report explaining the necessity for the action.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1131, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

20224.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20225.

The general manager may establish districtwide purchasing standards, the purpose of which is to insure the necessary quality of supplies and equipment purchased by, or under the supervision of, the district and to permit the consolidation of purchases in order to effect greater economy in district purchasing.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1131, Sec. 3.)
-------------------------------------------

20226.

Notwithstanding Section 20221, and upon a finding by two-thirds of all members of the board that the proposed purchase in compliance with Sections 20221 and 20222 does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the operation of district facilities or equipment, the board may direct the procurement of prototype equipment or modifications in an amount sufficient to conduct and evaluate operational testing without further observance of any provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1131, Sec. 4.)
-------------------------------------------

20227.

Notwithstanding Section 20221, the board may direct the purchase of any supply, equipment, or material without observance of any provision requiring contracts, bids, or notice upon a finding by two-thirds of all members of the board that there is only a single source of procurement therefor and that the purchase is for the sole purpose of duplicating or replacing supply, equipment, or material, as the case may be, in use.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1131, Sec. 5.)
-------------------------------------------

20228.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 20221, work on the Oakland Wye complex to the MacArthur Station project and on the Daly City turnback and storage facilities project may be performed by district personnel during periods of operation of the transit system when interconnection work is to be performed within 12 feet of the centerline of the existing track. 

(b) Notwithstanding Section 20221, interconnection work required for the Dublin-Pleasanton Extension, Warm Springs Extension, Pittsburg-Antioch Extension, Colma-San Francisco Airport Extensions, and work required by Department of Transportation retrofit or replacement projects may be performed by district personnel when the work is to be performed within 12 feet of the centerline of existing track or where the tie-in or startup of the work could affect operating train control, traction power, electrical control, or communications systems and the district has determined that there is a clear risk to safety of personnel or to passenger service which requires that district personnel perform the work. 

(c) Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b), it shall continue to be the policy of the district to perform all interconnection work by competitive bidding.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1991, Ch. 168, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20229.

In order to facilitate the participation of minority-owned and women-owned businesses in nonfederally funded contracts consistent with federally funded contracts, the district may establish for nonfederally funded contracts percentage goals for participation of those businesses in subcontracts and subsupply contracts in accordance with the provisions of Part 23 (commencing with Section 23.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations in effect on January 1, 1983.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 731, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20229.1.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the governing board of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District may direct the purchase of (1) electronic equipment, including, but not limited to, computers, telecommunications equipment, fare collection equipment, and microwave equipment and (2) specialized rail transit equipment, including, but not limited to, rail cars, and contracts for work that include, at a minimum, conversion of the rail car motive power system to alternating current or the complete replacement of existing rail car motive power units that utilize direct current, by competitive negotiation upon a finding by two-thirds of all members of the board that the purchase of that equipment in compliance with provisions of this code generally applicable to the purchase does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the district’s needs.

(b) Competitive negotiation, for the purposes of this section, shall include, as a minimum, all of the following elements:

(1) A request for proposal shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the district in its discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, notice of the request for proposal shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before the proposals are received. The district shall make every effort to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposal is received. 

(2) The request for proposal shall identify significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The district shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award. 

(4) Award shall be made to the qualified bidder whose proposal will be most advantageous to the district with price and other factors considered. If award is not made to the bidder whose proposal contains the lowest price, the board shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award. 

(c) The board may reject any and all proposals and request new proposals at its discretion. 

(d) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposal shall be filed with the district within 10 calendar days after the request for proposal is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (b). The district shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award. 

(2) Any bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award. 

(3) Any protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protestors shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the board prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals. 

(e) Where the district, through competitive negotiation, has entered into lease agreements for equipment of the type specified in subdivision (a) subsequent to December 1, 1980, the district may purchase the equipment directly from the lessor upon a finding by two-thirds of all members of the board that the purchase of that equipment in compliance with provisions of this code generally applicable to the purchase does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the district’s needs. 

(f) Provisions in any contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, which provisions are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1992, Ch. 1178, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 9. Southern California Rapid Transit District [20230. - 20234.]

20230.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Southern California Rapid Transit District, as provided for in Part 3 (commencing with Section 30000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20231.5.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the award of purchase contracts by the Southern California Rapid Transit District under competitive bid procedures may not be feasible for products and materials which are undergoing rapid technological changes or for the introduction of new technologies into district operations, and that in these circumstances it is in the public interest to consider the broadest possible range of competing products and materials available, fitness of purpose, manufacturer’s warranty, and other similar factors in addition to price in the award of these contracts.

(b) This section applies only to the purchase by the district of computers, telecommunications equipment, fare collection equipment, microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus, and of rail cars. This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(c) The board may, after a finding by a two-thirds vote that a particular procurement qualifies under subdivision (b), direct that the procurement be conducted through competitive negotiation under this section. For purposes of this section, competitive negotiation includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

(1) The request for proposals shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the board, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, notice of the request for proposals shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation, at least 10 days before the date for receipt of the proposals. The board shall make every effort to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposals is received.

(2) The request for proposals shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The board shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award.

(4) Award shall be made to the qualified proposer whose proposal will be most advantageous to the district, with price and all other factors considered. If award is not made to the bidder whose proposal contains the lowest price, the board shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(d) The board may reject any and all proposals and request new proposals, at its discretion.

(e) Upon making an award to a qualified proposer, the board, upon request, shall make available to all other proposers and to the public, an analysis of the award which provides the basis for the selection of that particular qualified proposal.

(f) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposals shall be filed with the district within 10 calendar days after the request for proposals is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (c). The district shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to the opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(2) Any bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award. 

(3) Any protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protestors shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the board prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, or prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals.

(g) Provisions in any contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, which provisions are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 591, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20232.

If, after rejecting bids, the board determines and declares by a vote of two-thirds of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20233.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a vote of two-thirds of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, property, or the public welfare, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed to respond to the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20234.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 12.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 10. Orange County Transit District [20240. - 20242.]

20240.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Orange County Transit District, as provided for in Part 4 (commencing with Section 40000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20241.

The purchase of all services, supplies, equipment, and materials, and construction of facilities and works, shall be done in the same manner, procedure and subject to the same limitations applicable to the County of Orange by the state law, now or as may hereafter be amended.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20242.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 13.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 11. San Joaquin Regional Transit District [20250. - 20253.]

20250.

This article applies to contracts by the San Joaquin Regional Transit District, as provided for in Part 5 (commencing with Section 50000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 704, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20251.

(a) (1) The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000), shall be by contract let, in the district’s discretion, either to the lowest responsible bidder or to a responsible bidder that submits a proposal that provides the best value to the
 district.

(2) For purposes of this subdivision, “best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit relative to the requirements described in the solicitation requirements.

(b) For the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials that exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), but does not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars
 ($75,000), the district shall obtain, to the extent practicable, a minimum of three written or oral quotes that permit the district to compare the prices and terms for the purchase.

(c) The construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure required exceeds three thousand dollars ($3,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the district may elect to have this construction be governed by Article 3 (commencing with Section 22030) of Chapter 2.

(d) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and
 readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 217, Sec. 1.   (SB 333)   Effective January 1, 2022.)
-------------------------------------------

20251.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 14.)
-------------------------------------------

20252.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by a four-fifths vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20253.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.1.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 12. Marin County Transit District [20260. - 20262.]

20260.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Marin County Transit District, as provided for in Part 7 (commencing with Section 70000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20261.

The purchase of all supplies, equipment and materials, and construction of facilities and works, shall be done in the same manner, procedure and subject to the same limitations applicable to the County of Marin by state law and by county ordinance, and as the same may hereafter be amended.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20262.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 15.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 13. San Diego County Transit District [20270. - 20274.]

20270.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Diego County Transit District, as provided for in Part 8 (commencing with Section 90000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20271.

The purchase of all supplies, equipment and materials, and the construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure required exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20272.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by a two-thirds vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20273.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of all its members, declare and determine that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.2.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20274.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 16.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 14. Santa Barbara Metropolitan Transit District [20280. - 20284.]

20280.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Barbara Metropolitan Transit District, as provided for in Part 9 (commencing with Section 95000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20281.

The purchase of all supplies, equipment and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), and the construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure exceeds three thousand dollars ($3,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 945, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

20282.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by a four-fifths vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20283.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.3.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20284.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 17.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 15. Santa Cruz Metropolitan Transit District [20290. - 20294.]

20290.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Cruz Metropolitan Transit District, as provided for in Part 10 (commencing with Section 98000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20291.

(a) The purchase of supplies, equipment, and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), shall be by contract let, in the district’s discretion, either to the lowest responsible bidder or to the responsible bidder that submits a proposal that provides the best value to the district. “Best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit relative to the requirements described in the solicitation documents.

 (b) The construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure required exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible
 bidder.

(c) The district shall obtain a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, that permit the comparison of prices and terms in either of the following circumstances:

(1) In the case of the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials, if the expected cost of procurement required exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000) and does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).

(2) In the case of the construction of facilities and works, if the expected cost of procurement required exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000) and does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(d) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are
 received.

(e) The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 107, Sec. 1.   (AB 1089)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

20292.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares a four-fifths vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20293.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a majority vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.4.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20294.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 18.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 16. Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority [20300. - 20306.]

20300.

The provisions of this article apply to contracts by the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority, as provided for in Part 12 (commencing with Section 100000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1999, Ch. 724, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2000.)
-------------------------------------------

20301.

(a) The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder, or, in the authority’s discretion, to the responsible bidder who submitted a proposal that provides the best value to the authority on the basis of
 the factors identified in the solicitation. “Best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit in response to the requirements described in the solicitation documents.

(b) To the extent practicable, the authority shall obtain a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, that permit prices and terms to be compared whenever the expected expenditure required for the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials exceeds five thousand dollars
 ($5,000), but does not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000).

(c) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and on the authority’s procurement internet website, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before the bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise at its discretion.

(d) This section applies solely to the procurement of supplies, equipment, and materials, and shall not apply to construction contracts.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 17, Sec. 1.   (AB 2812)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

20302.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by two-thirds vote of all its members that in its opinion, the supplies, equipment, and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment, and materials in the open market, if the open market purchase price is lower than the rejected bid, without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1996, Ch. 685, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1997.)
-------------------------------------------

20303.

In case of an emergency, as defined under Section 1102, the board, upon adopting a resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members, declaring and determining that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, may expend, or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of, any sum needed in the emergency without observing the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 373, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

20304.

Notwithstanding Section 20301, the board may direct the purchase of any supply, equipment, or material without observance of any provision requiring contracts, bids, or notice upon a finding by a vote of two-thirds of all its members of the board that there is only a single source of procurement therefor and that the purchase is for the sole purpose of duplicating or replacing supply, equipment, or material, as the case may be, in use.

(History: Added by Stats. 1996, Ch. 685, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1997.)
-------------------------------------------

20305.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the authority.

(c) A certified check made payable to the authority.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the authority.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the authority beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 20302 by Stats. 1996, Ch. 685, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1997.)
-------------------------------------------

20306.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the award of purchase contracts by the district under competitive bid procedures may not be feasible for products and materials that are undergoing rapid technological changes or for the introduction of new technologies into district operations, and that in these circumstances it is in the public interest to consider the broadest possible range of competing products and materials available, fitness of purpose, manufacturer’s warranty, vendor financing, performance reliability, standardization, life-cycle costs, delivery timetables, support logistics, and other similar factors in addition to price in the award of these contracts.

(b) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the board may direct the purchase the following:

(A) Computers, telecommunications equipment, fare collection equipment, radio and microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus.

(B) Specialized rail transit equipment, including, but not limited to, railcars or tunnel boring machines, by competitive negotiation upon a finding by two-thirds vote of all members of the board that the purchase of those products or materials in compliance with provisions of this code generally applicable to the purchase does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the district’s needs.

(2) This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(c) Competitive negotiation, for the purposes of this section includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

(1) A request for proposals shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the district in its discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, a notice of the request for proposals shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which shall be made at least 10 days before the date for receipt of the proposals. The district shall make reasonable efforts to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources, and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposal is received.

(2) The request for proposals shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The district shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award.

(4) Prior to making an award, the district shall prepare a price analysis and shall find that the final negotiated price is fair and reasonable based upon comparable procurements in the marketplace.

(5) Award shall be made to the qualified proposer whose proposal will be most advantageous to the district with price and other factors considered. If award is not made to the proposer whose proposal contains the lowest price, the district shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(d) The district may reject any and all proposals and issue a new request for proposals at its discretion.

(e) Upon making an award to a qualified proposer, the district, upon request, shall make available to all other proposers and to the public, an analysis of the award that provides the basis for the selection of that particular qualified proposal.

(f) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section pursuant to protest procedures established by the board as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposals shall be filed with the district within 10 calendar days after the request for proposals is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (c). The district shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the staff recommendation for award has been made available to the public as required by subdivision (e) of Section 20216.

(2) A bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the staff recommendation for award has been made available to the public as required by subdivision (e) of Section 20216.

(3) A protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protesters shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the district prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, or prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals.

(g) Provisions in a contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, that are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 574, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 17. Golden Empire Transit District [20310. - 20314.]

20310.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Golden Empire Transit District, as provided for in Part 13 (commencing with Section 101000) of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1984, Ch. 155, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

20311.

(a) (1) The construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure required exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder.

(2) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(3) When the expected procurement required exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000), the board shall seek a minimum of three quotations, either written or
 oral, which permit prices and other terms to be compared.

(b) (1) The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder or, in the district’s discretion, to the responsible bidder that submitted a proposal that provides the best value, as defined in paragraph (2), to the district on the basis of the factors identified in the solicitation.

(2) For the purposes of this section, “best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit in response to the requirements described in the solicitation documents.

(3) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and on the district’s procurement Internet Web site, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(4) To the extent practicable, when the expected procurement required exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), the board shall seek a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, which permit prices and other terms to be compared.

(5) This subdivision applies solely to the procurement of supplies, equipment, and materials and shall not apply to construction
 contracts.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2012, Ch. 220, Sec. 1.   (SB 1068)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

20312.

If, after rejecting bids, the board determines and declares by a four-fifths vote of all its members that, in its opinion, the supplies, equipment, and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment, and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20313.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend, or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of, any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.5.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20314.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 20.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 18. Sacramento Regional Transit District [20320. - 20324.]

20320.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Sacramento Regional Transit District, as provided for in Part 14 (commencing with Section 102000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20321.

Contracts for the construction of transit works or transit facilities in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding, except in emergency declared by four-fifths vote of the board of the district. If an emergency is declared and notice for bids to let contracts is not given, the board of the district shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 111, Sec. 1.   (AB 2634)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

20322.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 21.)
-------------------------------------------

20323.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the award of purchase contracts by the Sacramento Regional Transit District under competitive bid procedures may not be feasible for products and materials which are undergoing rapid technological changes or for the introduction of new technologies into district operations, and that in these circumstances it is in the public interest to consider the broadest possible range of competing products and materials available, fitness of purpose, manufacturer’s warranty, vendor financing, performance reliability, standardization, life-cycle costs, delivery timetables, support logistics, and other similar factors in addition to price in the award of these contracts.

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Board of Directors of the Sacramento Regional Transit District may direct the purchase of (1) computers, telecommunications equipment, fare collection equipment, microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus; (2) specialized rail transit equipment, including, but not limited to, rail cars; and (3) electric powered transit vehicles, by competitive negotiation upon a finding by two-thirds vote of all members of the board of the district that the purchase of that equipment in compliance with provisions of this code generally applicable to the purchase does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the district’s needs. Competitive negotiations may also be used for the purchase of replacement radio equipment, if the initial purchase of the radio equipment was done by competitive bidding. This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(c) Competitive negotiation, for the purposes of this section includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

(1) A request for proposal shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the district in its discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, notice of the request for proposal shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before the date for receipt of the proposals. The district shall make every effort to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposal is received.

(2) The request for proposal shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The district shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award.

(4) Prior to making an award, the district shall prepare a price analysis and shall find that the final negotiated price is fair and reasonable based upon comparable procurements in the marketplace.

(5) Award shall be made to the qualified proposer whose proposal will be most advantageous to the district with price and other factors considered. If award is not made to the proposer whose proposal contains the lowest price, the board shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(d) The district may reject any and all proposals and issue a new request for proposals at its discretion.

(e) Upon making an award to a qualified proposer, the district, upon request, shall make available to all other proposers and to the public, an analysis of the award which provides the basis for the selection of that particular qualified proposal.

(f) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposals shall be filed with the district within 10 calendar days after the request for proposals is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (c). The district shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(2) Any bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(3) Any protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protesters shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the board prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, or prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals.

(g) Provisions in any contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, which provisions are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1993, Ch. 250, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1994.)
-------------------------------------------

20324.

Notwithstanding Section 20321, the Board of Directors of the Sacramento Regional Transit District may construct all or any part of the Folsom Corridor Light Rail Extension and Double Tracking Project using a design and construct approach. If the board elects to design and construct the project, it shall comply with all of the following procedures:

(a) A request for qualifications shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of sources, as determined by the district, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of that portion of the extension the district elects to design and construct. In addition, notice of the request for qualifications shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, at least 10 days before the last date on which responses to the request for qualifications may be received. The request for qualifications shall identify the minimum standards that the district has determined shall be met or exceeded by a contractor to successfully design and construct the project described in this section. Those standards may include, but are not limited to, technical experience and capability, financial condition and capacity, organization, and personnel.

(b) All respondents determined by the district to meet or exceed the minimum standards set forth in the request for qualifications shall be considered prequalified. The district may repeat the prequalification process described in subdivision (a). If the district has prequalified at least three respondents, it may invite those prequalified to submit sealed bids for the project based upon plans and specifications previously prepared by the district. Only those who have been prequalified are eligible for award of a contract. Award shall be made to the prequalified bidder submitting the lowest responsible bid.

(c) The board may reject any and all bids and request new bids.

(d) The board shall not give any special preference in the design and construct bidding process authorized by this section to any contractor or consortium of contractors that worked on the initial designs of the Folsom Corridor Light Rail Extension and Double Tracking Project.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 52, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 19. San Mateo County Transit District [20330. - 20332.]

20330.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Mateo County Transit District, as provided for in Part 15 (commencing with Section 103000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20331.

Contracts for the construction of transit works or transit facilities in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding, except in emergency declared by the vote of seven members of the board. In the case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 2.6.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20332.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 22.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 20. Transit Development Boards [20340. - 20342.]

20340.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Diego Metropolitan Transit Development Board, as provided for in Division 11 (commencing with Section 120000) of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2005, Ch. 557, Sec. 1.   Effective October 5, 2005.)
-------------------------------------------

20341.

(a) Contracts for construction in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder submitting a responsive bid after competitive bidding, except in emergency declared by the vote of two-thirds of the membership of the board. If the expected construction contract exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000) and does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the board shall seek a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, that permit prices and other terms to be compared, and the board shall award the contract to the bidder who submitted the lowest quotation.

(b) If no bids are received, the project may be performed by a negotiated
 contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 536, Sec. 2.   (AB 1471)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

20342.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the board.

(c) A certified check made payable to the board.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the board.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the board beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 23.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 21. North San Diego County Transit Development Board [20350. - 20352.]

20350.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the North San Diego County Transit Development Board, as provided for in Division 11.5 (commencing with Section 125000) of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20351.

(a) Contracts for construction in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding, except in an emergency declared by the vote of two-thirds of the membership of the board.

(b) Notwithstanding any other law, the North County Transit District may opt in to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000)).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 554, Sec. 1.   (AB 3177)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

20352.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the board.

(c) A certified check made payable to the board.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the board.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the board beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 24.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 21.5. Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit District [20355. - 20355.7.]

20355.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit District, as provided for in Part 16 (commencing with Section 105000) of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.1.

(a) The purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials, when the expenditure required exceeds seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder, or, in the district’s discretion, to the responsible bidder who submitted a proposal that provides the best value to the district on the basis of the factors identified in the solicitation. “Best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit in response to the requirements described in the solicitation documents.

(b) To the extent
 practicable, the district shall obtain a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, that permit prices and terms to be compared whenever the expected expenditure required for the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), but does not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000).

(c) The construction of facilities and works when the expenditure required exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. This publication shall be made at least 10 days before the bids are received. The district may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its
 discretion.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 866, Sec. 1.   (SB 904)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.2.

If after rejecting bids the district determines that the supplies, equipment, and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the district may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment, and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.3.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of all its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.4.

(a) Upon determining that immediate remedial measures are necessary to avert or alleviate damage to property of the district or to repair or restore damaged or destroyed property of the district in order to ensure that the facilities of the district are available to serve the transportation needs of the general public, and upon determining that available remedial measures, including procurement in compliance with Sections 20355, 20355.1, 20355.2, and 20355.3 are inadequate, the general manager may authorize the expenditure of money previously appropriated specifically by the board for the direct purchases of goods and services, without observance of the provisions of those sections.

(b) The general manager shall, after any such expenditure, submit to the board a full report explaining the necessity for the action.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.6.

Notwithstanding Section 20355.1, and upon a finding by two-thirds of all members of the board that the proposed purchase in compliance with Sections 20355.1 and 20355.2 does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the operation of district facilities or equipment, the board may direct the procurement of prototype equipment or modifications in an amount sufficient to conduct and evaluate operational testing without further observance of any provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------

20355.7.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the governing board of the Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit District may direct the purchase of (1) electronic equipment, including, but not limited to, computers, telecommunications equipment, fare collection equipment, radio and microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus used in rail transit operations; and (2) specialized rail transit equipment, including, but not limited to, rail cars, by competitive negotiation upon a finding by two-thirds of all members of the board that the purchase of that equipment in compliance with provisions of this code generally applicable to the purchase does not constitute a method of procurement adequate for the district’s needs. This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(b) Competitive negotiation, for the purposes of this section, shall include, as a minimum, all of the following elements:

(1) A request for proposal shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the district in its discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, notice of the request for proposal shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before the proposals are received. The district shall make reasonable efforts to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposal is received.

(2) The request for proposal shall identify significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The district shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award.

(4) The award shall be made to the qualified bidder whose proposal will be most advantageous to the district with price and other factors considered. If the award is not made to the bidder whose proposal contains the lowest price, the board shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(c) The board may reject any and all proposals and request new proposals at its discretion.

(d) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposal shall be filed with the district within 10 calendar days after the request for proposal is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (b). The district shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to the opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(2) Any bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the district within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(3) Any protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protestors shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the board prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals.

(e) Provisions in any contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, which provisions are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 2002, Ch. 341, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 2003.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 23. Fresno Metropolitan Transit District [20370. - 20374.]

20370.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Fresno Metropolitan Transit District, as provided for in Chapter 1932 of the Statutes of 1961.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20371.

The purchase of all supplies, equipment and materials, and the construction of facilities and works, when the expenditure required exceeds three thousand dollars ($3,000), shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder. Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20372.

If after rejecting bids the board determines and declares by a four-fifths vote of all its members that in its opinion the supplies, equipment and materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the supplies, equipment and materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20373.

In case of any great public calamity, such as an extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, or other disaster, the board may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all its members declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in such emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20374.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 25.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 24. West Bay Rapid Transit Authority [20380. - 20381.]

20380.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the West Bay Rapid Transit Authority, as provided for in Chapter 104 of the Statutes of 1964, First Extraordinary Session.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20381.

The authority may construct the system or any part thereof, and acquire all property necessary therefor on terms and conditions that it deems advisable.

The authority, without awarding a contract for the construction of the system, or any part thereof, may do the work directly and may purchase materials, hire labor, and do all other things necessary for the doing of the work. When any part of the work is to be done or performed by any public body or by the United States jointly or in conjunction with the authority, the portion of the cost thereof to be borne by the authority may be turned over to the government of the United States or to any other public body to be expended by it in the acquisition, construction or completion of the system or any part thereof.

Construction contracts entered into by the authority are not subject to the State Contract Act pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 10100) and shall be governed solely by this act, except that Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 4200) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code is hereby expressly made applicable to the system, or any part thereof, under this act. Construction contracts may be entered into in the manner and upon terms that the authority deems advisable.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 50.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 24.5. Job Order Contracting Procurement by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority [20385. - 20389.]

20385.

The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature, in enacting this article, to authorize an alternative and optional procedure for bidding of public works projects that is applicable only to the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority to utilize job order contracts as a delivery method.

(b) The availability of job order contracting as a delivery method for the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority will not preclude the use of traditional delivery methods.

(c) It is the intent of the
 Legislature that job order contracts of the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority be competitively bid and awarded to bidders providing qualified responsive bids.

(d) The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority should have the authority to use the procurement method outlined in this article for job order contracts, notwithstanding any other applicable procurement requirements.

(e) This article will not affect work that is protected by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s collective bargaining agreements.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20385.5.

As used in this article, “Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority” or “authority” means the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority created by Section 130050.2 of the Public Utilities Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20386.

(a) (1) The authority may use the procurement method outlined in this article for job order contracts.

(2) The authority shall not contract for work that is protected by applicable collective bargaining agreements. All job order contracts shall comply with all authority collective bargaining agreements.

(3) Job order contracts of the authority shall be competitively bid and awarded to bidders providing qualified responsive bids.

(4) Job order contracts shall be for repair, remodeling, or other repetitive work to be done according
 to unit prices. No annual contracts may be awarded for any new construction.

(5) A job order contract shall be subject to the project labor agreement between the authority and the Los Angeles/Orange Counties Building and Construction Trades Council, or an amendment or extension of that
 agreement.

(b) Solicitations for job order contracts shall progress as follows:

(1) The authority shall prepare a set of solicitation documents for job order contracts. The documents shall include a unit price catalog or other established unit prices, job order contract terms, job order contract technical specifications, and any other information the authority deems necessary to adequately describe the authority’s needs.

(2) An architect, engineer, consultant, or contractor retained by the authority to assist in the development of the job order contract solicitation documents shall not be eligible to bid or to participate in the preparation of a job order contract bid.

(3) The authority may award multiple job order contracts in response to a single job order contract solicitation.

(c) The authority shall develop a system for evaluating job order contract bids for award of job order contracts.

(d) The award of a job order contract shall progress as follows:

(1) The authority shall prepare a request for bids for job order contracts based on the documents prepared under paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) that invites job order contractors to submit sealed bids in the manner prescribed by the authority.

(2) Each bidding job order contractor shall include in its bid one or more
 adjustment factors to the established unit prices provided in the request for bids based on the contract technical specifications.

(3) Each bidding job order contractor shall agree to identify any subcontractors to be used for the job orders performed pursuant to the job order contract.

(4) The award of job order contracts, if any, shall be made to a job order contractor or to job order contractors that the authority determines to be qualified and responsive based upon preestablished criteria to be determined by the authority.

(5) The job order contractors shall comply with the authority’s project labor agreement, as applicable.

(6) Notwithstanding paragraph
 (4), the authority, by a process determined by the authority, may award any job order for repair or renovation work with a value equal to or less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) to a job order contractor that is also a certified small business enterprise, as established by the authority’s small business enterprise certification process or any similar certification process acceptable to the authority, or to a job order contractor that is also a disabled veterans business enterprise, as certified by the Department of General Services.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20386.5.

(a) The maximum total dollar amount that may be awarded under a single job order contract shall not exceed five million dollars ($5,000,000) in the initial contract term of the job order contract. No single job order may exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000).

(b) Job order contracts may be executed for an initial contract term of no more than 12 months and may be extended or renewed for two subsequent annual terms and a maximum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) over the subsequent two terms of the contract.

(c) Work shall not be split or separated into smaller job orders for the purpose of
 evading the cost limitation provisions of this article.

(d) Dollar amounts specified in this section may be adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20387.

(a) All work bid under job order contracts shall comply with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 and is subject to all of the penalties and provisions set forth in that chapter.

(b) For purposes of this article, if a job order contractor chooses to use a subcontractor, the job order contractor shall verify that the subcontractor possesses and maintains the appropriate licenses and credentials required.

(c) If the authority, after conducting an administrative due process review, determines that there has been a violation of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1, including, but
 not limited to, bid shopping by the job order contractor, the authority may terminate the job order contract, declare the contractor ineligible for future job order contracts for a period of time to be determined by the authority, or withdraw authorization for the contractor to proceed with awarded work.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20387.3.

(a) A job order contract shall set forth in the general conditions of the job order contract the party or parties responsible for seeing that Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code is complied with.

(b) For purposes of job order contracting, prevailing wages shall apply to all work ordered under the job order contract regardless of thresholds set forth in Section 1771.5 of the Labor Code.

(c) The job order contractor shall pay the prevailing wage in effect at the time the job order contract is issued by the authority and all increases as published
 by the Department of Industrial Relations for the term of the job order contract, including all overtime, holiday, and shift provisions published by the Department of Industrial Relations.

(d) The authority shall designate one individual to act as a monitor to inspect job sites for labor compliance violations at the request of the designated labor representative in its project labor agreement.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20387.5.

In order to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse, the authority shall prepare for each individual job order developed under a job order contract an independent cost estimate. The estimate shall be prepared prior to the receipt of any job order contractor’s estimate for the work and shall be compared to the job order contractor’s estimate to determine the reasonableness of that estimate before issuance of any job order. If the authority finds the job order contractor’s estimate to perform work for a given job order to be unreasonable, not cost effective, or undesirable, the authority may elect not to issue the job order to the job order contractor, and may, instead, utilize any other available procurement procedures or choose not to move forward
 with the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20388.

(a) The authority shall submit to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature, on or before January 1, 2028, a report on the use of job order contracting under this article. The report shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following information:

(1) A description of the authority’s system for evaluating job order contract bids for award of job order contracts, including, but not limited to, the criteria used by the authority to determine a qualified and responsive job order contractor.

(2) A description of each job order contract awarded and the contractor
 awarded the contract.

(3) An assessment of the use of job order contracting under this article.

(b) A report to be submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 20389.)
-------------------------------------------

20389.

This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2029, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 87, Sec. 1.   (AB 499)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Article 24.5, commencing with Section 20385.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 25. Boards of Supervisors—County Highways [20390. - 20397.]

20390.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by boards of supervisors for the construction, repair, or maintenance of a county highway, as provided for in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 1070) of Division 2 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20391.

(a) Whenever the board of supervisors finds that the estimated expense of any necessary work upon any county highway exceeds the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), the board shall order definite surveys of the proposed work to be made and shall direct the preparation of profiles, cross-sections, plans, and specifications.

(b) The Board of Supervisors of the County of Los Angeles may delegate the duties described in subdivision (a) to the county road commissioner on a project-by-project basis.

(c) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030, and
 as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 21.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.   See later operative version added by Sec. 22 of Stats. 2020, Ch. 371.)
-------------------------------------------

20391.

(a) Whenever the board of supervisors finds that the estimated expense of any necessary work upon any county highway exceeds the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), the board shall order definite surveys of the proposed work to be made and shall direct the preparation of profiles, cross-sections, plans, and specifications. 

(b) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2030.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 21) and added by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 22.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Section operative January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20392.

Upon receipt of such profiles, cross sections, plans, and specifications, the board shall publish a notice calling for sealed bids for the performance of the work specified. The notice shall refer to said profiles, cross sections, plans, and specifications, and shall set a time at which bids will be opened. The board shall cause this notice to be published for at least 10 consecutive times, prior to the date set for opening bids, in a daily newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the county and designated by the board, or for at least two consecutive times prior to such date in a weekly newspaper printed and published in the county and designated by the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20392.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the county.

(c) A certified check made payable to the county.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the county.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the county beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 26.)
-------------------------------------------

20393.

At the time specified in the notice, the board shall publicly open all bids received and shall award the contract for the work to the lowest responsible bidder, unless the board finds that the bids are too high, and that the work can be done more cheaply by day labor. In such case, the board shall reject the bids and order the work to be done by the road commissioners in whose districts the work is situated. In any case, the board may reject all bids and advertise for new bids in the manner specified in this article. The board may provide, by resolution, that the bids be opened, examined, and declared by an officer designated in the resolution. Any such resolution shall require that the bids be opened at a public meeting called by the officer and that the results of the bidding be reported to the board at a subsequent regular board meeting. The notice inviting bids shall state the time and place of the public meeting and the name of the designated officer.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20394.

Whenever the board finds that the estimated expense of any work to be done upon any county highway is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less, the board or the purchasing agent may let a contract covering both work and material, or purchase the material and let a contract for doing the work, or purchase the materials and do the work by day labor, without calling for bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20394.5.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, whenever the board of supervisors finds that the estimated expense of any work to be done upon any county highway is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or less, the board or the purchasing agent may have the work done by contract upon notice describing the work in general terms and stating a closing date for submission of bids.

Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published within the jurisdiction of the county. Notice shall be published in accordance with Section 6066 of the Government Code and shall be completed at least 48 hours before the time scheduled for opening of the bids. Notice inviting bids may also be published in a trade publication.

The successful bidder shall give a bond in the amount the board requires, conditioned on the faithful performance of the contract, and on the payment of all labor employed and material used in the work.

The board may delegate its authority under this section to the county road commissioner.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1985, Ch. 365, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20395.

(a) In any county that has appointed a road commissioner pursuant to Section 2006 of the Streets and Highways Code, or in any county that has abolished the office of road commissioner and complied with Section 2006.1 of the Streets and Highways Code, the board of supervisors may authorize the road commissioner, or a registered civil engineer under the direction of the county director of transportation, to have any work upon county highways done under their supervision and direction. The work may be done in any of the following ways:

(1) By letting a contract covering both work and material. In that event, the contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in this article.

(2) By
 purchasing the material and letting a contract for the performance of the work. In that event, the material shall be bought at the lowest possible cost and the contract let to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in this article.

(3) By purchasing the material and having the work done by day labor, in which case advertising for bids is not required.

(4) (A) By authorizing the county road commissioner or a registered civil engineer under the direction of the county director of transportation to execute changes or additions to the work for any contract pursuant to this section in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) for contracts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or less, or 10 percent for contracts over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) but not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any change or
 addition to the work exceed a net total addition of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(B) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract cost in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). Notwithstanding subdivisions (b) and (c), no change or alteration shall exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(b) The County of Los Angeles may elect to be subject to all of the following provisions:

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred
 thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding on the County of Los Angeles, and all existing protest and grievance procedures regarding that decision remain valid.

(4) At the time
 the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the board shall implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision, subdivision (c) of Section 20142, subdivision (e) of Section 20405, subdivision (b) of Section 20614, and subdivision (b) of Section 20998, exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Los Angeles shall provide a review report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee on Governance and Finance no later than July 1, 2026.

(c) The County of Santa Clara may elect to be subject to
 all of the following provisions:

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county
 engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding on the County of Santa Clara, and all existing protest and grievance procedures regarding that decision remain valid.

(4) At the time the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the board shall implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision and subdivision (d) of Section 20142 exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Santa Clara shall provide a review report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee
 on Governance and Finance no later than July 1, 2026.

(d) By purchasing the material and letting a contract for the work or by letting a contract covering both work and material without advertising for bids when the estimated cost of emergency work necessitated by the imminence or occurrence of a landslide, flood, storm damage, or other emergency exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) and the public interest and necessity demand immediate action to safeguard life, health, or property.

(e) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended (as amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 3) by Stats. 2023, Ch. 281, Sec. 2.   (AB 1649)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.    See later operative version added by Sec. 4 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20395.

In any county that has appointed a road commissioner pursuant to Section 2006 of the Streets and Highways Code, or in any county that has abolished the office of road commissioner and complied with Section 2006.1 of the Streets and Highways Code, the board of supervisors may authorize the road commissioner, or a registered civil engineer under the direction of the county director of transportation, to have any work upon county highways done under their supervision and direction. The work may be done in any of the following ways:

(a) By letting a contract covering both work and material. In that event, the contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in this article.

(b) By purchasing the material and letting a contract for the performance of the work. In that event, the material shall be bought at the lowest possible cost and the contract let to the lowest responsible bidder as provided in this article.

(c) By purchasing the material and having the work done by day labor, in which case advertising for bids is not required.

(d) (1) By authorizing the county road commissioner or a registered civil engineer under the direction of the county director of transportation to execute changes or additions to the work for any contract pursuant to this section in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) for contracts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or less,
 or 10 percent for contracts over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) but not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any change or addition to the work exceed a net total addition of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract cost in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any change or alteration exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars
 ($210,000).

(e) By purchasing the material and letting a contract for the work or by letting a contract covering both work and material without advertising for bids when the estimated cost of emergency work necessitated by the imminence or occurrence of a landslide, flood, storm damage, or other emergency exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) and the public interest and necessity demand immediate action to safeguard life, health, or property.

(f) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2027.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 3) and added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 4.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20396.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in any county employing a competent engineer as road commissioner, the board of supervisors may elect to perform work or projects or let contracts for the performance of work or projects under the provisions of the State Contract Act pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 10100) of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Public Contract Code; and when such election is made, references in said act to state shall mean county, and references to any state agency shall mean county board of supervisors, or such county agency as the board of supervisors may designate, and the provisions of said act shall be fully applicable to work or projects so to be performed by the county.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20397.

In counties containing a population of two million or over and employing a registered engineer as road commissioner, the board of supervisors may authorize the moving, relocation, or reestablishment of detention camps by force account or day labor where such camps are used in connection with county highway construction or maintenance work, if the board determines that such work of moving, relocation, or reestablishment can be done more economically and satisfactorily by force account or day labor than by contract, and that the total estimated cost of new or additional building structural materials necessary to be purchased in order to perform such work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 26. Boards of Supervisors—County Bridges or Subways [20400. - 20409.]

20400.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by boards of supervisors for the construction, maintenance and repair of a county bridge or subway, as provided for in Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 1300) of Division 2 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20402.

Except as provided in Sections 20406 to 20408, inclusive, whenever the cost of construction or repair of any bridge will exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000), such construction or repair shall be done by contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20403.

Whenever the board of supervisors finds that the estimated expense of any work to be done on any county bridge is ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or less, the board or the purchasing agent may let a contract covering both work and material, or purchase the materials and let a contract for doing the work, without calling for bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20404.

(a) The board of supervisors shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for such construction or repair and shall cause a notice, calling for bids therefor, to be published in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. Such notice shall be published for at least 10 consecutive times in a daily newspaper of general circulation published in the county or for at least 2 consecutive times in a weekly newspaper published in the county. If there is no newspaper published in the county, such notice shall be given by posting in three public places in the county for at least two weeks.

(b) The Board of Supervisors of the County
 of Los Angeles may delegate the duties described in subdivision (a) to the county road commissioner on a project-by-project basis.

(c) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 23.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.   See later operative version added by Sec. 24 of Stats. 2020, Ch. 371.)
-------------------------------------------

20404.

(a) The board of supervisors shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for such construction or repair and shall cause a notice, calling for bids therefor, to be published in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. Such notice shall be published for at least 10 consecutive times in a daily newspaper of general circulation published in the county or for at least 2 consecutive times in a weekly newspaper published in the county. If there is no newspaper published in the county, such notice shall be given by posting in three public places in the county for at least two weeks. 

(b) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2030.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 23) and added by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 24.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.   Section operative January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20405.

(a) The board shall afford all bidders an opportunity to examine the plans, specifications, and working details, and shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. The board may provide by resolution that the bids be opened, examined, and declared by an officer designated in the resolution. The resolution shall require that the bids be opened at a public meeting called by the officer and that the results of the bidding be reported to the board at a subsequent regular board meeting. The notice inviting bids shall state the time and place of the public meeting and the name of the designated officer.

(b) All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover
 and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the county.

(3) A certified check made payable to the county.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the county.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the county beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(c) The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute
 a bond, approved by the board, for the faithful performance of the contract. The person shall perform the work in accordance with the plans, specifications, and working details, unless all or any of them are modified by a four-fifths vote of the members of the board. In that case, if the cost of the work is reduced by reason of the modification, the person to whom the contract is awarded shall make an allowance on the contract price to the extent of the reduction.

(d) In any county that has appointed a road commissioner pursuant to Section 2006 of the Streets and Highways Code, or in any county that has abolished the office of road commissioner and complied with Section 2006.1 of the Streets and Highways Code, the board may authorize the road commissioner, or a registered civil engineer under the direction of the county
 director of transportation, to execute changes or additions to the work for any contract made pursuant to this article in an amount not to exceed:

(1) For contracts whose original cost is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(2) For contracts whose original cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract.

(3) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered
 shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract that is in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). Notwithstanding subdivision (e), no change or addition shall exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(e) The County of Los Angeles may elect to be subject to all of the following provisions: 

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index. 

(2) For contracts whose
 original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (d) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding on the County of Los Angeles, and all existing protest and grievance procedures regarding that decision remain valid. 

(4) At the time the board delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (d) with regard to the contract costs specified
 in this subdivision, the board shall implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision, subdivision (c) of Section 20142, subdivision (b) of Section 20395, subdivision (b) of Section 20614, and subdivision (b) of Section 20998, exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Los Angeles shall provide a review report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee on Governance and Finance
 no later than July 1, 2026.

(f) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 5.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.   See later operative version added by Sec. 6 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20405.

(a) The board shall afford all bidders an opportunity to examine the plans, specifications, and working details, and shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. The board may provide by resolution that the bids be opened, examined, and declared by an officer designated in the resolution. The resolution shall require that the bids be opened at a public meeting called by the officer and that the results of the bidding be reported to the board at a subsequent regular board meeting. The notice inviting bids shall state the time and place of the public meeting and the name of the designated officer.

(b) All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover
 and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the county.

(3) A certified check made payable to the county.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the county.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the county beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(c) The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a
 bond, approved by the board, for the faithful performance of the contract. The person shall perform the work in accordance with the plans, specifications, and working details, unless all or any of them are modified by a four-fifths vote of the members of the board. In that case, if the cost of the work is reduced by reason of the modification, the person to whom the contract is awarded shall make an allowance on the contract price to the extent of the reduction.

(d) In any county that has appointed a road commissioner pursuant to Section 2006 of the Streets and Highways Code, or in any county that has abolished the office of road commissioner and complied with Section 2006.1 of the Streets and Highways Code, the board may authorize the road commissioner, or a registered civil engineer under the direction of the county director of transportation,
 to execute changes or additions to the work for any contract made pursuant to this article in an amount not to exceed:

(1) For contracts whose original cost is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(2) For contracts whose original cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract.

(3) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand
 dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract that is in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any change or addition exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(e) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2027.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 5) and added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 6.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20406.

If the board of supervisors is advised by the county surveyor or, in a county not having a county surveyor, by the officer having similar duties and authority, that the work can be done for a sum less than the lowest responsible bid, the board may reject all bids and order the work done by day labor, under the supervision and direction of the county surveyor or officer having similar duties and authority. In such case, the road commissioners in their respective districts shall employ all labor required, and direct the conduct of the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20407.

In the event of great emergency, including, but not limited to, states of disaster defined in Section 8558 of the Government Code, upon the majority vote of the board, the board may proceed at once to replace or repair any and all bridges without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details and without letting contracts or calling for bids. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the board or by contract, or by a combination of the two. If done wholly or in part by contract, the contractor shall be paid the actual cost of the use of machinery and tools and of material and labor expended by him or her in doing the work, plus not more than 15 percent to cover all profits, supervision, and any other expense. No more than the lowest current market prices shall be paid for materials.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 542.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20409.

The board of supervisors may authorize such road commissioner to employ such workmen and purchase such materials, equipment, tools, and appliances and cause such work to be done as is necessary to construct or maintain such bridges and to keep them in repair without adopting plans and specifications, or working details and without advertising for bids as required in Sections 20402, 20403, and 20404. The cost of such construction, maintenance or repair shall be paid out of the county road funds or out of the county general fund.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 27. Legislative Bodies—Improvement Act of 1911 [20410. - 20464.]

20410.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by legislative bodies for the doing of work or the furnishing of materials, supplies and equipment, as provided for in the Improvement Act of 1911, Division 7 (commencing with Section 5000) of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20411.

Before the legislative body awards any contract for doing any work or for furnishing materials, supplies and equipment or any portion thereof, authorized by this division, the legislative body shall pass a resolution ordering the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20412.

Notice shall be posted inviting sealed proposals or bids for doing such work, or for furnishing materials, supplies and equipment or any portion thereof. Notice inviting such proposals, and referring to the specifications on file, shall be published, but if there is no newspaper published in the city, then it shall only be posted. The time fixed for the opening of the bids shall be not less than 10 days from the time of the first publication or posting of the notice.

Said notices shall state the estimated cost of any acquisition, which estimated cost is required to be advanced as a part of the incidental expenses
 referred to in Section 5256 of the Streets and Highways Code, at the time of entering into the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20413.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the city.

(c) A certified check made payable to the city.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city.

The security shall be
 in an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the amount of the bid. No bid shall be considered unless one of the forms of bidder’s security is enclosed with it.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the city beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 28.)
-------------------------------------------

20414.

The proposals or bids shall be delivered to the clerk, or any other officer designated by the legislative body, and the legislative body shall, in open session publicly open, examine and declare the same. If the legislative body by resolution so provides the proposals or bids may be opened, examined and declared by an officer designated in the resolution. Any such resolution shall require that the proposals or bids be opened at a public meeting called by the officer designated who shall report the results of the bidding to the legislative body at the next regular meeting after the opening of the bids. In the event of such resolution the notice inviting bids
 shall state the time and place of said public meeting and the officer so designated. No proposal or bid shall be considered unless accompanied by the check or bond satisfactory to the legislative body.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20415.

The legislative body may reject any and all proposals or bids should it deem this for the public good, and also the bid of any party who has been delinquent or unfaithful in any former contract with the city, and shall reject all proposals or bids other than the lowest regular proposal or bid of any responsible bidder, and may award the contract for said work or improvement to the lowest responsible bidder at the prices named in his bid. If the bids are rejected the legislative body shall thereupon return to each bidder the check or bond which accompanied his bid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20416.

Whenever the total amount bid by the lowest responsible bidder plus the estimated amount of incidental costs would result in assessments under this division which exceed by more than 15 percent the engineer’s estimate of cost of the proposed work to be assessed, as stated in the “Notice of Improvement” referred to in Section 5193 of the Streets and Highways Code, the legislative body shall direct the clerk to give notice by mail of such increase over the estimated cost.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20417.

If the bids are rejected or no bids are received the legislative body may readvertise for proposals or bids for the performance of the work as in the first instance, without further proceedings, and thereafter proceed in the manner provided in this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20418.

The check or bond accompanying any proposal or bid which is accepted shall be held by the clerk until the contract for doing the work has been entered into, either by the lowest bidder or by the owners of three-fourths part of the frontage, whereupon the certified check or bond shall be returned to the bidder. If the bidder fails, neglects or refuses to enter into the contract to perform the work, the certified check accompanying his bid and the amount therein mentioned, shall be declared to be forfeited to the city and shall be collected by it and paid into the general fund, and any bond forfeited may be prosecuted, and the amount due thereon collected and
 paid into the general fund.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20419.

If any local, state or national agency or authority contributes the labor, or labor and any portion of the materials, supplies or equipment necessary for the construction of any improvement authorized under this division, the contract shall be for only those items which are not contributed by any such agency or authority. If proposals or bids are invited only for the furnishing of materials, supplies and equipment or any portion thereof not furnished by such agency or authority, the notice shall contain a statement to the effect that the legislative body may cancel the order for any undelivered materials, supplies or equipment by giving the successful bidder
 24 hours notice of the cancellation, in which event the successful bidder will be entitled to compensation for only so much of the material, supplies and equipment as has been used prior to the giving of such notice of cancellation at the prescribed unit rates stated in the contract, and that the contractor shall agree to accept the return of any and all materials and supplies not used prior to the giving of such notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20420.

Notice of the award of the contract shall be published by the clerk.

The clerk shall, upon payment of the statutory fee prescribed therefor, record a notice of the award of contract in the office of the county recorder. Said recordation shall constitute notice to all persons that all property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district shall be assessed at the time of the confirmation of the assessment under Chapter 16 (commencing at Section 5360) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code to pay the costs of the improvement in proportion to the benefits which the property receives from
 the improvement, notwithstanding the acquisition of the property by the state or any of its agencies, or by any county, city, municipality or other public or municipal corporation. Said notice shall be substantially as follows:NOTICE OF AWARD OF CONTRACT IN
 PROPOSED ASSESSMENT DISTRICTPursuant to the requirements of Section 5248 of the Streets 
and Highways Code, notice is hereby given that a contract has 
been awarded by (Legislative body)to (Contractor)for(Nature of improvement)inDistrict No. (Improvement or assessment)and relating to the following described real property: 

(The real property in the assessment district may be described by:

a. Stating its exterior boundaries; or

b. Giving a description
 thereof according to any official or recorded map; or

c. Referring to a plat or map filed with the clerk of the legislative body, which shall indicate by a boundary line the extent of the territory included in the assessment district, and shall govern for all details as to the extent of the assessment district.)

This shall constitute notice to all persons that all property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district shall be assessed at the time of the confirmation of the assessment under Chapter 16 (commencing at Section 5360) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code to pay the costs of the improvement in proportion to the benefits which said property receives from the improvement, notwithstanding the acquisition of any such property by the state or any of its agencies, or by any county, city, municipality or other public or municipal corporation.Reference is made to the minutes of the action takenby(Legislative body)on file in my office for full particulars.Dated: (Clerk of )

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20421.

The owners of three-fourths of the area of lands liable to be assessed, or their agents (who shall make oath that they are the owners or agents) are not required to present sealed proposals or bids, but may within 10 days after the first publication, or first posting if there is no publication, of the notice of the award of the contract, elect to take the work and enter into a written contract to do the whole work at the price at which the contract has been awarded. All work done under the written contract is subject to regulations which may be prescribed by ordinance of the legislative body.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 53.)
-------------------------------------------

20422.

If the owners fail to elect to take the work, and to enter into a written contract therefor within 10 days, or to commence the work within 15 days after the date of the written contract, and to prosecute the work with diligence to completion, the superintendent of streets shall enter into a contract with the original bidder to whom the contract was awarded, and at the prices specified in his or her bid.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 54.)
-------------------------------------------

20423.

If the original bidder neglects, fails or refuses, for 25 days after the first publication of the notice of the award of the contract, to enter into the contract, the legislative body, without further proceedings, shall again advertise for and receive proposals or bids, as in the first instance, and award the contract for the work to the then lowest regular bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20424.

If no bids are received in response to this second call for bids, the legislative body may again advertise for and receive bids under the same proceedings at any time and let the contract to the then lowest bidder, and such delay shall in no way affect the validity of any of the proceedings or assessments levied thereunder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20425.

The bids of all persons and the election of all owners who have previously failed to enter into the contract shall be rejected in any bidding or election subsequent to the first for the same work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20426.

All contractors, contracting owners included, shall, at the time of executing any contract for the work, execute a bond to the satisfaction and approval of the superintendent of streets and payable to the city, in a sum not less than 25 percent of the amount of the contract, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1983, Ch. 18, Sec. 32.   Effective April 21, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

20427.

At any time prior to publication and posting notice inviting bids, the legislative body by resolution, may determine that if the contractor, contracting owners included, does not complete the work within the time limit specified in the contract or within the further time that the legislative body authorized, the contractor or contracting owners, as the case may be, shall pay to the city liquidated damages in the amount fixed by the legislative body in the resolution. The amount so fixed is valid as liquidated damages unless manifestly unreasonable under the circumstances existing at the time the contract was made. If this determination is made, the plans or specifications and the contract shall contain provisions in accordance with that determination.

Any moneys received by the city on account of those liquidated damages shall be applied as follows:

(1) If received prior to confirmation of the assessment, those moneys shall be applied as a contribution against the assessment.

(2) If received after the confirmation of the assessment, those moneys shall be applied in the manner provided in Section 5132.05 of the Streets and Highways Code for the disposition of excess acquisition funds.

(3) If a contribution has previously been made or ordered by any agency, the legislative body may order a refund to the contributing agency in the proportion that the contribution bears to the total costs and expenses of the work.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 303, Sec. 422.   (AB 731)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

20428.

If the owner or contractor who may have taken any contract does not complete the work within the time limited in the contract, or within such further time as the legislative body may give him, or abandons or fails to proceed with the work, the legislative body may declare him in default and may either relet all or any portion of the work, or it may complete the work by direct purchase of labor and materials, and the owner or contractor shall pay to the city the entire cost of completing the work before the warrant is delivered to the owner or contractor.

Notice of the declaration of default shall be given by the
 clerk of the legislative body to the owner or contractor by personal service or by mail. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner or contractor shall forthwith quit the work, and shall receive no payment for any work performed thereafter, unless ordered by the legislative body to resume the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20429.

Before being entitled to a contract, the bidder to whom the award was made, or the owners who have elected to take the contract, must advance to the superintendent of streets, for payment by him, the cost of publication of the notices, resolutions, orders and matters required under the proceedings prescribed in this division, and of such other notice as may be deemed requisite by the legislative body, together with all other incidental expenses incurred up to the time of entering into the contract, including the estimated cost of any acquisition which the legislative body may determine to be payable at said time, but limited to the amount specified in the
 notice inviting bids pursuant to Section 5241 of the Streets and Highways Code. All other acquisition costs shall be payable at the time of the delivery to the contractor, or his agent, or assigns, of the warrant, assessment and diagram as provided in Section 5375 of the Streets and Highways Code. The legislative body may waive the payment in advance of all or any part of the incidental expenses and acquisition costs by resolution adopted not later than the time of ordering the work. The waiver must appear in the notice inviting bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20430.

If the work is abandoned by the city before work is actually started or before any materials, supplies or equipment have been furnished or used, the incidental expenses incurred previous to such abandonment shall be paid out of the city treasury, but such expense for which the city is liable and which shall have been paid by it may be charged as incidental expenses against the district benefited in any new proceeding had or taken for any work which includes substantially the same work as that which was included in the abandoned proceedings.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20431.

At any time within 10 days from the date of the first publication of the notice of award of the contract, any owner of, or other persons having any interest in, any lot or land liable to assessment, who claims that any of the previous acts or proceedings relating to the work are irregular, defective, erroneous or faulty, may file with the clerk a written notice specifying in what respect the said acts and proceedings are irregular, defective, erroneous or faulty. The notice shall state that it is made pursuant to this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20432.

All objections to any act or proceeding occurring prior to the time within which such objections are permitted to be filed in relation to the work, not made in writing and in the manner and at the time specified, shall be waived, if the resolution of intention to do the work has been actually published, as provided in this division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20433.

If in the opinion of the legislative body the public interest will not be served by allowing the property owners to take the contract it may so provide in the resolution of intention.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20434.

An action to determine the validity of proceedings relating to the work and the validity of any contract entered or to be entered into pursuant thereto may be brought by the legislative body or by the contractor pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. For such purpose proceedings shall be deemed to be in existence upon the award of the contract. An action may be commenced and concluded by the legislative body before the publication of the notice inviting bids, and for such purpose the proceedings shall be deemed to be in existence upon the adoption of the resolution ordering the
 work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20435.

In such action, all findings, conclusions and determinations of the legislative body which conducted the proceedings shall be conclusive in the absence of actual fraud.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20436.

If an action is commenced under the provisions of this chapter to determine the validity of any contract or proposed contract, and the contract has not been signed, the contractor shall not be obligated to sign the same until a judgment sustaining the validity of the proceedings and the proposed contract has become final. If the contractor has signed and executed the contract, he shall not be obligated to begin work until a judgment sustaining the validity of the proceedings and the contract has become final. If a judgment is entered holding the contract invalid, the contractor shall be discharged and relieved of all obligation under the contract, and he and
 his sureties shall be discharged and relieved of all obligation upon any bond required by law in connection with such contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20436.5.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the action authorized by this chapter shall not be brought by any person other than the legislative body or the contractor, nor shall the action be brought after the date fixed for the beginning of work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20437.

The superintendent of streets is hereby authorized in his official capacity to make all written contracts, and to receive all bonds authorized by this division and to do any other act, either expressly or impliedly required by this division, that pertains to the street department.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20438.

He shall fix the time for the commencement, which shall not be more than 45 days from the date of the contract, and for the completion of the work under each contract entered into by him. The work shall be prosecuted with diligence from day to day thereafter to completion.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20439.

He may extend the time fixed for completion of the work from time to time, under the direction of the legislative body. All applications for extensions of time, if in writing, must be filed in the office of the clerk before the expiration of the original time fixed in the contract, or of the time granted by extension, as the case may be. An extension of time may be granted by the legislative body after the expiration of the time originally fixed in the contract or as previously extended, and the extension so granted shall be deemed to commence and be effective from the date of such expiration. Any extension of time shall not release the sureties upon any
 bond required under this division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20440.

The work, in all cases, shall be done under the direction and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets and the materials used shall comply with the specifications and be to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets and all contracts made therefor shall contain a provision to that effect unless the legislative body by resolution adopted within 10 days after the passage of the resolution ordering the work directs that the work shall be done under the direction of the engineer and the materials used shall comply with the specifications and be to the satisfaction of the engineer, instead of the superintendent of streets, and in such case the
 contract shall contain a provision to that effect.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20441.

The legislative body also may by resolution adopted within 10 days after the passage of the resolution ordering the work provide and direct that the assessment thereafter to be made in the proceeding shall be made and signed by the engineer instead of by the superintendent of streets.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20442.

The contract shall contain express notice that, in no case, except where it is otherwise provided by law or by charter will the city, or any officer thereof, be liable for any portion of the expense, nor for any delinquency of persons or property assessed.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20443.

The legislative body may, by ordinance, prescribe general rules directing the superintendent of streets or the engineer, as the case may be, and the contractor as to the materials to be used, and the mode of executing the work, under all contracts thereafter made. The assessment and apportionment of the expenses of all such work shall be made by the superintendent of streets or the engineer, as the case may be, in the mode provided by this division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20444.

If any fiscal agent of the United States government contributes any money or materials to be used in the construction of any work provided for in this division, the requirements of the agency contributing such money or materials may be incorporated in the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20445.

If a contribution of labor or of labor and any portion of materials, supplies or equipment is to be made by any local, state or national agency or authority, the contract shall contain a provision that the legislative body may cancel the order for any undelivered materials, supplies or equipment by giving the contractor 24 hours notice of said cancellation, and require the contractor to accept the return of the unused materials and supplies, in which event the contractor will be entitled to compensation for only so much of the materials, supplies and equipment as has been used prior to the giving of such notice. The contract shall also contain a provision
 that no materials, supplies or equipment shall be delivered until a delivery permit signed by the superintendent of streets has been received by the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20446.

“Changes” as used in this chapter shall include corrections, alterations, modifications, additions, omissions, increases or decreases.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20447.

Unless the power to proceed shall have ceased at the conclusion of the hearing on the resolution of intention because of a majority protest, at any time before the confirmation of the assessment the legislative body may make changes in, to or from the boundaries of the proposed assessment district, the work proposed to be done, or any act, determination or provision made, or permitted to be made, by the legislative body under and pursuant to this division, which act, determination or provision does not affect the jurisdiction of the legislative body to order the work or improvement; provided, that after the award of the contract no such changes shall be made
 without the written consent of the contractor or the bidder to whom the contract shall have been awarded. The legislative body shall not change the boundaries to include any territory which will not, in its judgment, be benefited by the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20448.

At the hearing on the resolution of intention, the legislative body, without further notice and hearing, may order any changes, as defined in Sections 20446 and 20447, except changes to include additional territory in the assessment district. Any changes to include additional territory and all changes after the hearing on the resolution of intention shall be ordered only as provided in this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 543.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20449.

Before ordering any changes made, the legislative body shall adopt a resolution briefly describing the changes proposed to be made, stating the amount of the estimated increase or decrease in the cost of the work by reason of the proposed changes and giving notice of a time and place when and where any interested person having any objection to the changes proposed to be made may appear before the legislative body and show cause why the changes should not be ordered. The resolution shall also contain the name and telephone number of a local department or agency designated by the legislative body to answer inquiries regarding the hearing proceedings. Such
 notice shall be omitted if the hearing of objections is not required as provided hereunder. The resolution may describe the changes by referring to maps, plats, plans, profiles, detailed drawings, or specifications on file in the office of the clerk or engineer, which shall indicate the changes proposed to be made and which shall govern for all details thereof. The resolution shall be published pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.

The hearing of objections shall not be required if the legislative body, when considering passage of the resolution, finds and determines by a four-fifth’s vote of all members thereof, that all of the owners of lots or lands liable to be assessed, or their agents, who shall make oath that they are such agents, have signed and filed a petition waiving the hearing, with the clerk, on or before the fifth day prior to the day that the resolution is considered for passage, declaring
 that they do not have any objections to the proposed changes and requesting that the hearing of objections shall not be required.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20450.

If a resolution required under Section 20449 proposes to include additional territory in the assessment district, at least 15 days prior to the hearing fixed therein, the clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to all persons owning real property within the additional territory whose names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the clerk. This section shall not apply if the hearing of objections is not required pursuant to Section 20449.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 544.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20451.

Written objections to the proposed changes may be filed with the clerk by any interested person at any time not later than the time set for the hearing. The legislative body shall hear and pass upon the objections at the time appointed, or at any time to which the hearing thereof may be adjourned, and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. If no written objections to the changes have been delivered to the clerk up to the hour set for hearing thereon, or if the objections have been heard and found by the legislative body to be insufficient or have
 been overruled or denied, immediately thereupon the legislative body by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members shall acquire jurisdiction to order the changes made. If the hearing of objections is not required, pursuant to Section 20449, immediately upon passage of the resolution the legislative body shall acquire jurisdiction to order the changes made. The decisions and determinations of the legislative body ordering the changes shall be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to appeal thereupon to the legislative body.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 545.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20452.

(a) No changes, except as provided in Section 20453, shall be made pursuant to this chapter that will increase the estimated assessable cost by more than 20 percent of the total estimated cost of the work as determined from either of the following:

(1) The engineer’s estimate, if the change is ordered prior to the award of the contract.

(2) The successful bid, if the change is ordered after the award of the
 contract.

(b) Any changes made pursuant to subdivision (a) shall also be subject to the limitations, if any, contained in any law applicable to the proceedings that imposes limitations upon the amount by which the estimated cost of the work or improvement may be increased by reason of those changes.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 546.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20453.

Changes may exceed the 20-percent limitation in cost when the legislative body orders such changes. That portion of the added cost which exceeds the 20-percent limitation shall be paid by the city.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20454.

Any changes made pursuant to this chapter shall not release or discharge the sureties upon any bond required under this division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20455.

(a) After construction has begun, the legislative body, or the superintendent of streets if authorized by the legislative body, may order changes in the work without the necessity of a hearing. The order shall be in writing, and the amount of any change ordered shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), nor 10 percent of the amount of any original contract that exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but does not exceed two hundred fifty
 thousand dollars ($250,000). 

(b) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract costs in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any such change or alteration exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000).

(c) The limitations on the cost of changes permitted by this section shall not apply where (1) the change is requested in writing by the owner of property subject to assessment for the improvement under construction and the nature of the change requested is such that the cost thereof will be assessed exclusively against the property of the person requesting the change, or (2) the change in the work will not adversely
 affect the benefiting property and any increase in the cost resulting from the changes will be paid by the city and will not be assessed against the property within the assessment district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 215, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

20456.

Subject to the limitations of Section 20455, the contract may include a provision to determine a fair and equitable price for changes in the work, including, but not limited to, arbitration or cost plus a fixed fee.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 547.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20457.

Every contractor, to whom is awarded any contract for street work under this division, shall at the time of signing and executing the contract, file with the superintendent of streets a good and sufficient bond, approved by the street superintendent in a sum not less than one-half of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20458.

The bond shall provide that the contractor or subcontractor shall pay for any materials, provisions, provender, or other supplies or use of implements or machinery used in, upon, for or about the performance of the work contracted to be done, or for any work or labor done thereon of any kind.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1983, Ch. 18, Sec. 33.   Effective April 21, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

20459.

Any person furnishing materials, provisions, provender or other supplies used in, upon, for or about the performance of the work contracted to be executed or performed, or any person renting or hiring teams or implements, or machinery for, or contributing to, the work to be done, or any person who performs work or labor upon the same, or any person who supplies both work and materials and whose claim has not been paid by the contractor or by the subcontractors of the contractor may, at any time within 30 days from the date of the recordation of the assessment file with the superintendent of streets a verified statement of his claim, together with a statement
 that the same, or some part thereof, has not been paid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20460.

Each person whose claim has not been paid by the contractor or his subcontractors, shall have a first lien upon and against the assessment, any partial assessment, any reassessment and any bonds which may be issued to represent any assessment or reassessment, which lien may be enforced by action brought within three months after the date of the filing of the verified statement in the superior court of the county in which such work is done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20461.

No assignment by the contractor of the whole or any part of the money, assessment,
 partial assessment, any reassessment and any bonds which may be issued to represent any assessment or reassessment, due or to be due under the contract, or for “extras” in connection therewith, whether made before or after a verified claim is filed pursuant to this chapter, shall take priority over the claims, and the assignment shall have no binding force insofar as the rights of the claimants, or their assigns, are concerned. None of the provisions of Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code shall be applicable to any assessment, partial assessment, reassessment, bonds, moneys or funds payable to the contractor or assignee under this division or to any matter contained in this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 49.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20462.

If any contractor disputes the correctness or validity of any claim filed pursuant to this chapter, the city or superintendent of streets may permit the contractor to deliver to the city or superintendent of streets a bond satisfactory to said city or superintendent of streets executed by the contractor and some corporation authorized to issue surety bonds in a penal sum equal to one and one-fourth times the amount of the claim.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20463.

The bond shall guarantee the payment of any sum which the claimant may recover on the claim together with his costs of suit in the action, if he shall recover therein. If such bond is filed, the city, any officer thereof, or superintendent of streets shall not withhold any moneys or funds, assessment, partial assessment, any reassessment and any bonds which may be issued to represent any assessment or reassessment from the contractor on account of the claim. The sureties upon the bond shall be jointly and severally liable to the claimant with the sureties upon the contractor’s original labor and material bond posted by the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20464.

Suit against the sureties on the bond of the contractor filed pursuant to this chapter may be brought by any claimant, or his assigns, at any time after the claimant has ceased to perform labor or furnish materials or both and until the expiration of six months after the period in which verified claims may be filed. The filing of a verified claim shall not be a condition precedent to the maintenance of such action against the sureties on the bond and an action on the bond may be maintained separately from and without the filing of an action against the city or officer by whom the contract was awarded. Upon the trial of the action, the court shall award to
 the prevailing party a reasonable attorney’s fee, to be taxed as costs, and to be included in the judgment therein rendered.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 28. Separation of Grade Districts [20470. - 20477.]

20470.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by Separation of Grade Districts, as provided for in Part 2 (commencing with Section 8100) of Division 9 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20471.

The commission shall, pursuant to an order entered in the minutes, advertise for bids for the construction of the project either as a whole or in sections, as it may deem fit, in accordance with the plan theretofore adopted and filed, by publishing a notice calling for bids at least once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published within the district. The notice shall refer to the order and plan for further particulars. If the commission elects to receive separate bids for the construction of sections of the project, the order shall describe the sections for which separate bids are desired. The commission may advertise at the same time and in the same notice both for bids for the construction of the project as a whole and for bids for the construction of separate sections.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20471.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidders security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the commission.

(c) A certified check made payable to the commission.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the commission.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the commission beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 29.)
-------------------------------------------

20472.

Every contract for the construction of the project or for any section, if it is to be constructed in sections, shall be let, after advertisement, to the lowest responsible bidder, or the commission may reject all bids for the construction of the project or for any section, and may readvertise for bids for doing the work in the same manner and for the same length of time as provided for a notice calling for bids for construction.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20473.

Before the making of any contract the bidder shall give a bond to the district for the faithful performance of his contract, which shall be signed by the bidder and sureties satisfactory to the commission, in an amount equal to at least 50 percent of the amount of the contract price and shall give another bond conditioned upon the payment of claims for labor and material in connection with the performance of his contract containing the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 3 of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code and subject to the provisions of that chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20474.

The contract shall be executed on behalf of the district by the commission, subject to approval or rejection by the electors of the district, expressed at an election called for the purpose of issuing bonds or authorizing the tax levy for the payment of the contract. If the electors fail to approve the bond issue, or fail to authorize the tax levy, the contract shall be null and void without notice and the commission shall immediately return the bonds to the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20475.

The commission may do any or all maintenance or repair work upon the project, either with or without contract, and with or without advertising for bids for contracts, unless the cost of the work exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000), in which event it shall be done only under contract after advertising for bids in the same manner and for the same length of time as provided for advertising for bids and letting contracts for construction work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20476.

The commission may hire all necessary engineers, inspectors and superintendents to supervise the performance of contracts entered into by the commission, or to have charge of doing all work done without contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20477.

As to any project involving a state highway where the plans have been approved by the Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, the commission and the department may enter into and carry out contracts pursuant to Section 130 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 29. Public Entities—Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 [20480. - 20497.]

20480.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by cities, cities and counties, or counties, or other entities, public corporations, or agencies authorized to operate under the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, as provided for in Division 12 (commencing with Section 10000) of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20481.

At any time after the preliminary approval of the report provided for in Section 10300 of the Streets and Highways Code, the legislative body may let the contract or contracts for all or any part of the improvement and authorize such acts and proceedings as are necessary to acquire works or appliances already installed, or other property, as authorized by this division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20482.

Each contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice inviting sealed proposals is published pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in a newspaper published in the municipality, and designated by the legislative body for that purpose, or if there is no such newspaper by such posting as the legislative body may provide. The time fixed for the opening of the bids shall not be less than 14 days after the first publication or posting of the notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20483.

(a)All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security which amounts to 10 percent of the bid:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the legislative body.

(3) A certified check made payable to the legislative body.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the legislative body.

The amount so posted shall be forfeited to the municipality if the bidder does not, within 15 days after written notice that the contract has been awarded to the bidder, enter into a contract with the municipality for the work. Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the legislative body beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(b) The faithful performance of the contract shall be secured by an undertaking in that penal sum as the legislative body requires, but not less than 25 percent of the contract price, satisfactory to the legislative body. When the proceedings include the acquisition or construction of works, appliances, or improvements to be owned, managed or controlled by a public agency other than the municipality making the acquisitions or ordering the work done, the legislative body of the municipality may require that the undertaking also inure to the benefit of the public agency to the extent of its interest in the entire project. The contractor shall also furnish a labor and material bond as required by law in a sum not less than 50 percent of the contract price.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 30.)
-------------------------------------------

20484.

Notice of award of the contract shall be published by the clerk of the legislative body once in the newspaper in which the notice of improvement was published.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20485.

The owners of three-fourths of the area of lands assessed or liable to be assessed, or their agents (who shall make oath that they are such owners or agents), shall not be required to present sealed proposals or bids, but may, within 10 days after the publication of the notice of the award of the contract, elect to take the work and enter into a written contract to do the whole work at prices not exceeding the prices specified in the bid of the bidder to whom the contract was awarded, and all work done under such contract shall be subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by the legislative body.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20486.

If the owners fail to elect to take the work and to enter into a written contract therefor within 10 days, or to commence the work within 15 days after the date of the written contract, and to prosecute the same with diligence to completion, a contract shall be entered into with the original bidder to whom the contract was awarded at the prices specified in his bid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20487.

If, in the opinion of the legislative body, the public interest will not be served by allowing the property owners to take a contract, it may so provide in the resolution of intention. In that event, no notice of award of contract need be published pursuant to Section 20484.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 548.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20488.

The contract shall provide that the work shall be done strictly in accordance with the plans and specifications contained in the report provided for in Sections 10200, 10201, 10202, 10203, 10204, and 10300 of the Streets and Highways Code. The work shall be done under the supervision of the board officer, or person by whom the report was made, and no work or portion of the work shall be paid for until it is approved for payment by that board officer, or person, but this shall not prevent approval of and payment for completed portions of the work as it progresses. Payment made for completed portions of the work shall not constitute final acceptance of these portions or of the completed project.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20489.

The provisions of the Improvement Act of 1911 relating to liquidated damages are incorporated in this division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20490.

If the contractor abandons the work, or fails to proceed with the work as rapidly as required by his contract, the legislative body may declare him in default and relet the work in the manner set forth in this chapter for letting the original contract, or it may complete the work by direct purchase of labor and materials, and retain out of any funds due or to become due the contractor the amount of the cost of the work and any expense incidental to reletting the contract or performing the work, and also hold the contractor and his sureties responsible for such cost and expense, and for any damages resulting from the abandonment or failure upon his bond.

Notice of the declaration of default shall be given by the clerk of the legislative body by personal service or by mail. Upon receipt of such notice, the contractor shall forthwith quit the work, and shall receive no payment for any work performed thereafter unless ordered to resume the work by the legislative body.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20491.

At any time within 10 days after the award of any contract pursuant to this chapter, or if no bids are received, at any time within 10 days after the time fixed for the opening of bids by resolution adopted by a vote of two-thirds of all its members, the legislative body may order that the proposed contract be not made, and that the municipality itself execute the work in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted for the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20492.

If the work is abandoned by the city before work is actually started or before any materials, supplies or equipment have been furnished or used, the incidental expenses incurred previous to such abandonment, unless provision has otherwise been made therefor, shall be paid out of the city treasury, but such expense for which the city is liable and which shall have been paid by it may be charged as incidental expenses against the district benefited in any new proceeding had or taken for any work which includes substantially the same work as that which was included in the abandoned proceedings.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20496.

The provisions of Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code are hereby expressly made applicable to the construction of works and improvements under this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 50.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20497.

If in the opinion of the legislative body the public interest will not be served by allowing the property owners to take the contract it may so provide in the resolution of intention.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 30. City Councils—Street Lighting Act of 1919 [20500. - 20507.]

20500.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by a city council, as provided in the Street Lighting Act of 1919, Part 1 (commencing with Section 18000) of Division 14 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20501.

(a) The city council shall, within 10 days after the establishment of the district, invite bids for the making of the improvement by ordering a notice of the invitation to be published by two successive insertions in a daily or weekly newspaper published or circulated in the city and designated by the city council for that purpose. However, if the city council determines that there is only one contractor practically capable of serving the street lighting system to be improved in the manner provided in the plans and specifications contained in the report provided for in Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 18040) of Part 1 of Division 14 of the Streets and Highways Code and that the contractor is subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, the city council may, in its discretion, without competitive bidding, order the improvement to be carried out by the contractor in accordance with rates and rules filed by it from time to time with the Public Utilities Commission.

(b) All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security which amounts to 10 percent of the bid:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the city.

(3) A certified check made payable to the city.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city.

The security shall be forfeited to the city in case the bidder depositing it does not, within 15 days after the notice that the contract has been awarded to him or her, enter into a contract with the city for making the improvement, the faithful performance of which shall be secured by an undertaking in those penal sums as the city council shall require, with sureties satisfactory to that body. In any case where competitive bidding is required, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the city beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 31.)
-------------------------------------------

20502.

The contract shall require that the improvement be made, and the improvement shall be made, strictly in accordance with the plans and specifications contained in the report provided for in Chapter 3 of Part 1 of Division 14 of the Streets and Highways Code.

The contract for service shall be for a period not less than three years from and after the date electric energy and service is first delivered to the lighting district pursuant to such contract and shall be extended automatically thereafter for successive terms of one year each; provided, that the agreement may be terminated by either party upon not less than 60 days’ written notice prior to the expiration date of the original term or any extended term; and provided further, that the contract for service may be for a period of less than three years by mutual consent of the city council and the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20503.

The improvement shall be made under the supervision of the board, officer or person designated by the city council, and no portion shall be paid for until it has been accepted by that board, officer or person.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20504.

If the contractor abandons the making of the improvement, or fails to proceed with it as rapidly as required by his contract, the city council may relet the contract in the same manner as in the case of the first letting thereof and retain the amount of the cost of the portion relet, and of any expenses incidental to the reletting, out of any funds due or to become due to the contractor. The city council may also hold the contractor and his sureties responsible upon his bond for such cost and expense, and for any damages resulting from such abandonment or failure.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20505.

The city council may, at any time within 20 days after the opening of bids, or, if no bids are received, at any time within 20 days after the time fixed for the opening of bids, order by resolution adopted by a vote of two-thirds of all of its members, that the city itself execute the work of the improvement, or any part thereof, in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted for such work, or for such part thereof, and employ the labor and provide the materials, appliances, supplies or illuminating agent necessary therefor. The cost and expenses of such work, or of such part thereof, shall be paid out of the special fund collected to pay for the improvement. If the city council orders that only a part of the work of the improvement be executed by the city then the city council may reject all bids, if any, received for such part of the work and may proceed with the award of the contract for the remaining part of the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20506.

If the work of the improvement, or any part thereof, is executed by the city, then the amount appropriated and used from the special fund to pay the costs and expenses of the work or part thereof executed by the city shall not exceed the amount of the respective lowest valid bid received for such work or for such part thereof, or, if no bids have been received and the work of the improvement is executed by the city the amount appropriated and used from the special fund to pay the costs and expenses of such work shall not exceed the amount of the respective estimate thereof provided for in Section 18041 of the Streets and Highways Code. If such costs and expenses exceed the amount of the said bid, or of the said estimate in case no bids are received, then such excess cost and expense shall be paid out of any moneys in the general fund in the city treasury.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20507.

At any time after the funds for the proposed improvement, or any part thereof, are in the hands of the city treasurer, the city council may, without calling for bids, order by resolution, adopted by a vote of two-thirds of all its members, that the city itself execute the work of such improvement, or any part thereof, in accordance with the plans and specifications adopted for such work or for such part thereof, and employ the labor, and provide the materials, appliances, supplies or illuminating agent necessary therefor. In such case the costs and expenses of such work, or of such part thereof, shall be paid out of the aforesaid funds, except that if such costs and expenses exceed the amount of the respective estimates provided for in Section 18041 of the Streets and Highways Code, then such excess shall be paid out of the moneys in the general fund in the city treasury.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 31. City Councils—Street Lighting Act of 1931 [20510. - 20514.]

20510.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by a city council, as provided in the Street Lighting Act of 1931, Part 2 (commencing with Section 18300) of Division 14 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20511.

At any time after the installment assessment becomes delinquent, the superintendent of streets may call for bids for such improvement and may fix a date, not less than 20 nor more than 30 days after the publication of a notice inviting bids for such improvement, for the receipt of such bids at his office at an hour not later than 10 a.m. on such date. Such notice shall be published once in a daily or weekly newspaper published and circulated in the city and designated by the city council for that purpose.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20512.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security which amounts to 10 percent of the bid:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the city.

(c) A certified check made payable to the city.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the city.

The check or bond shall be forfeited to the city if the bidder depositing it does not within 10 days after the publication of a notice of award of the contract to him or her, enter into the necessary contract with the city. Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the city beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 32.)
-------------------------------------------

20513.

The contract shall specify a date certain when the improvement shall be started, the date to be not more than 30 days after the execution thereof, and that the contract shall continue in force for a period of one year from the effective date of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20514.

The city council may, by resolution passed prior to the notice inviting bids, impose such other reasonable conditions, including faithful performance bonds and materialmen’s bonds, as may in its discretion appear to be necessary and proper.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 32. City Councils—Municipal Lighting Maintenance District Act of 1927 [20520. - 20522.]

20520.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by a city council, as provided in the Municipal Lighting Maintenance District Act of 1927, Part 3 (commencing with Section 18600) of Division 14 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20521.

The city council shall make all contracts and all necessary provisions for the furnishing of the maintenance and operation finally determined upon for the lighting systems which are to be maintained and operated from funds of the district. Such contracts shall be made in the same manner and after the same notice and by the same persons as other city contracts for such items of maintenance and operation are made unless such contracts of the city are not required to be made after competitive bidding. In that case the contracts for the district shall be let only after competitive bidding and the officer whose duty it is to let contracts for such items for the city shall give or cause to be given a notice inviting sealed bids on the items to be purchased and fix a time and place at which the bids will be opened and declared in public. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, or if necessary for the public good any and all bids may be rejected and in such case readvertisement shall be had in the same manner as before. The notice inviting bids shall be published at least twice and the first publication shall be at least 10 days before the time set for opening the sealed bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20522.

(a) All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(3) A certified check made payable to the district.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

(b) Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 549.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 33. Joint Highway Districts [20530. - 20541.]

20530.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by a joint highway district, as provided in the Joint Highway District Act, Part 1 (commencing with Section 25000) of Division 16 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20531.

All construction work shall be done by contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated within the district which has been designated by the secretary or the board of directors for that purpose. The advertising shall be done by means of two publications of the notice inviting bids the first of which shall be not less than 10 days prior to the time fixed for receiving the bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20532.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 34.)
-------------------------------------------

20533.

All bids shall be delivered to the secretary of the board of directors not later than the hour fixed for receiving bids and shall thereafter be publicly opened by the secretary in the presence of the board of directors assembled in public session.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20534.

The board of directors shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. However, before awarding the contract the board may:

(a) Reject all bids should it deem this necessary for the good of the district.

(b) Reject the bid of any bidder who has been delinquent or unfaithful in any former contract with either the district, or any county composing the district, or with the state.

(c) Reject the bid of any bidder who is unable to satisfy the board of directors of his ability, financially or otherwise, to perform the contract for the proposed work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20535.

If all bids have been rejected because it appears that they are too high and that the work can be done more cheaply by day labor, the board may, in lieu of readvertising for bids, order the work done by day labor under the supervision of the district engineer.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20536.

The bidder to whom any contract is awarded shall, within 20 days after the date of the award by the board of directors, execute a contract to perform the work. The contract shall be in a form approved by an attorney employed by the board of directors.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20537.

Before the contract is executed, the person to whom it is awarded shall execute bonds for the faithful performance of the contract and for the payment of all claims for labor and material thereunder in the manner provided by law and in the form approved by an attorney employed by the board of directors.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20538.

All of the bonds shall be executed by the bidder and by a corporate surety duly authorized to do business as such under the laws of the State of California. Each bond shall be in an amount not less than 50 percent of the aggregate contract price. The contract shall not be executed on behalf of the district until all the contract bonds are approved by the president of the board of directors and the district engineer.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20539.

The president or vice president and secretary or assistant secretary shall sign and attest all construction contracts on behalf of the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20540.

All construction contracts shall provide that a maximum of eight hours shall constitute a day’s labor and that three dollars ($3) shall be the minimum amount paid for a day’s labor performed upon any construction work covered by the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20541.

If any bidder to whom a contract is awarded fails to enter into the contract and execute the required bonds, the board of directors shall declare the check accompanying the bid of such bidder to be forfeited. Upon cashing the check the proceeds shall be placed to the credit of the construction fund of the district. The board of directors may thereupon award the contract to the next lowest responsible and acceptable bidder, or may call for new bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 34. Boulevard Districts [20550. - 20557.]

20550.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by a boulevard district, as provided for in Part 2 (commencing with Section 26000) of Division 16 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20551.

The commission shall, pursuant to an order entered in its minutes, advertise for bids for the construction of the boulevard, either as a whole or in sections as it may see fit, in accordance with the plan theretofore adopted and filed, by publishing a notice calling for bids at least once a week for two successive weeks in a weekly newspaper published within the district if there is such a newspaper published therein, otherwise in a newspaper published at the county seat of the county in which the district is located. The notice shall refer to the order and plan for further particulars. If the commission elects to receive separate bids for the construction of sections of the boulevard, the order shall describe the sections for which separate bids are desired.

The commission may advertise at the same time and in the same notice both for bids for the construction of the boulevard as a whole and for bids for the construction of separate sections.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20551.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 35.)
-------------------------------------------

20552.

Every contract for the construction of the boulevard or for any section, if it is to be constructed in sections, shall be let, after advertisement, to the lowest responsible bidder, or the commission shall reject all bids for the construction of the boulevard or for any section and may readvertise for bids for doing the work in the same manner and for the same time as bids were originally called for.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20553.

Before the making of any contract the bidder shall give a bond to the district for the faithful performance of his contract, which shall be signed by the bidder and sureties satisfactory to the commission in an amount equal to at least 50 percent of the amount of the contract price.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20554.

The contract shall be executed on behalf of the district by the commission, subject to approval or rejection by the electors of the district, expressed at an election called for the purpose of issuing bonds for the payment of the contract. If the electors fail to approve the bond issue, the contract shall be void and the commission shall immediately return the bond to the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20555.

If the cost of any construction work on the boulevard does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) the commission may make contracts therefor without advertisement or it may do the work without letting any contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20556.

The commission may do any or all maintenance or repair work upon the boulevard, either with or without contract, and with or without advertising for bids for contracts unless the cost of the work exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000), in which event it shall only be done under contract after advertising for bids in the same manner as provided for advertising for bids and letting contracts for construction work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20557.

The commission may hire all necessary engineers, inspectors and superintendents to supervise the performance of contracts entered into by the commission, or to have charge of doing all work done without contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 35. Irrigation Districts [20560. - 20570.]

20560.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by irrigation districts, as provided for in the Irrigation District Law, Division 11 (commencing with Section 20500) of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20561.

As used in this article “works” is limited to any works to be paid for with the proceeds of the sale of bonds or a limited assessment.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20562.

Contracts for the construction of any works shall be made pursuant to the provisions of this article except when the board, with the approval of the commission, elects to proceed to construct the works or any part thereof under its own superintendence.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20563.

The board shall give notice by publication once a week for three successive weeks in a newspaper published in the county in which the principal office of a district is kept, or if no newspaper is published in that county, in a newspaper the board deems advisable, calling for bids for the construction of the works or of any portion of them.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 550.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20564.

The notice calling for bids shall contain:

(a) A statement that the plans and specifications of the works to be constructed may be seen at the district office.

(b) A particular description of the portion of the works advertised if less than the whole works are advertised.

(c) A statement that the board will receive sealed bids for the construction of the works advertised or any portion of them designated by the board.

(d) A statement that the contract or contracts for the works advertised will be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders, but that any or all bids may be rejected.

(e) A statement of the time and place for opening the bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20564.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 36.)
-------------------------------------------

20565.

At the time and place appointed the bids shall be opened in public.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20566.

After opening the bids and as convenient the board shall award the contract or contracts for the works either in portions or as a whole to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders, but the board may reject any or all bids and readvertise for proposals or may proceed to construct the works or any part thereof under its own superintendence.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20567.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 1.6.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20568.

Contracts for the purchase of material to be furnished or used by the district in the works shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders after such notice as the board deems proper.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20569.

Any person to whom a contract may be awarded pursuant to this article shall provide a bond approved by the board, payable to the district for at least 25 percent of the estimated contract price, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1983, Ch. 18, Sec. 35.   Effective April 21, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

20570.

The works shall be constructed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the engineer of the district and be subject to the approval of the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 36. Water Storage Districts [20580. - 20590.]

20580.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by water storage districts, as provided for in the California Water Storage District Law, Division 14 (commencing with Section 39000) of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20581.

Before making any contract for the construction or improvement of works in carrying out any project totaling twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or more, the board shall advertise for bids.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 3.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20582.

When work is to be done, the board shall give notice calling for bids by publication in the county in which the principal office of a district is kept once a week for four consecutive weeks.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 551.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20583.

If less than the whole work provided for in the plans and specifications is to be done, the portion to be done must be particularly described in the notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20584.

The notice shall set forth that:

(a) Plans and specifications of the work to be done can be seen at the office of the board.

(b) The board will receive sealed bids.

(c) The contract will be let to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The bids will be opened in public at a given time and place.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20584.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 37.)
-------------------------------------------

20585.

The board may either:

(a) Let the work to the lowest responsible bidder.

(b) Reject any or all bids and readvertise for proposals.

(c) Proceed to construct the work under its own superintendence.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20586.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20587.

Contracts for the purchase of materials only shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, except that the board may reject any or all bids for the furnishing of materials only and thereafter either readvertise for bids or solicit offers from not less than three responsible persons to furnish materials.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20588.

Upon receipt of an offer for a less price than that specified in the lowest rejected bid, the board may enter into a contract for the furnishing of the materials with the person who has offered them at the lowest price.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20589.

Any person to whom a contract is awarded shall enter into a bond, to be approved by the board, payable to the district for its use, for 25 percent of the amount of the contract price, conditioned for the full and faithful performance of the contract. The work shall be done under the direction and to the satisfaction of, and be approved by, the board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1983, Ch. 18, Sec. 36.   Effective April 21, 1983.)
-------------------------------------------

20590.

All contracts and other documents executed by the board shall be signed by the president and by the secretary.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 37. County Waterworks Districts [20600. - 20615.]

20600.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by county waterworks districts, as provided for in the County Waterworks District Law, Division 16 (commencing with Section 55000) of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20601.

All contracts for construction of a work of improvement for the district in excess of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, except that contracts under seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) may be let pursuant to informal bidding procedures established by the board, and except that county waterworks districts may contract with each other, with the county, or, where the district is a subsidiary district of a city, with the city, for furnishing labor, materials, or supplies required for any improvement mentioned in this division upon such terms and conditions as their boards may elect. With the approval of the board of supervisors and the board of directors of the district, if any, or, where the district is a subsidiary district of a city, with the
 approval of the city council, and upon the terms and conditions they may determine, all contracts for construction of a work of improvement for the district, including those under three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500), may be let by the county or city purchasing agent, as applicable.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 332, Sec. 78.1.   (SB 113)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

20602.

The district shall advertise in the county pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code, inviting sealed proposals for furnishing labor, materials and supplies for the proposed improvement before any contract for construction of a work of improvement for the district shall be made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2009, Ch. 332, Sec. 78.2.   (SB 113)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

20602.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 38.)
-------------------------------------------

20603.

The district shall have the right to require such bonds as it may deem best from the successful bidder, to insure the faithful performance of the contract, and shall also have the right to reject any and all bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20604.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the district shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20605.

When the board of supervisors and the board of directors of the district, if any, determine that any work of repairing, improving, renewing or extending district facilities can be done more economically and satisfactorily by day labor without letting contracts to the lowest bidder as provided in Section 20601, the governing body of the district may cause the work to be done by day labor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20606.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the county when ordered by the board of supervisors, or the city when ordered by the city council where the district is a subsidiary district of the city, to make the proposed improvement without a contractor therefor, and to purchase the materials and supplies, and employ the labor necessary for the purpose.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20607.

The board of supervisors may, except in incorporated cities or towns, order and contract for any of the work, and the acquisition of any of the property contemplated, to be done or authorized to be acquired under this division, and to provide, if ordered by four-fifths of the members of the board of supervisors, that the cost shall be borne by a district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20608.

Any improvement for which bonds are voted under the provisions of this division, shall be made in conformity with the general description of the proposed improvement as provided for in the proceedings authorizing issuance of the bonds.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20609.

Whenever for any reason water system facilities are proposed to be installed in a district by someone other than the district itself, or the installation cost is proposed to be paid by someone other than the district itself, and the facilities are to be thereafter dedicated to the district for public use, and the board determines that it is necessary and convenient to the purposes of the district that the acceptance of said dedication be conditional upon the water system facilities being adequate to serve land other than and in addition to land proposed by the installer to be served thereby, the board may by contract agree to reimburse and may reimburse the installer for the proportionate part of the total cost of such water system facilities which will serve and benefit other land, upon such terms as may be agreed upon.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20610.

The reimbursement contract may provide that the reimbursement will be made in periodic payments over an agreed period of time not to exceed 10 years, exclusively out of charges imposed upon land and collected from persons owning the land other than the land proposed by the installer to be served by the water system facilities. The other land that may connect to and be served by the water system facilities shall be specified in the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20611.

Under no circumstances shall the total amount of all reimbursement payments made or agreed to be made exceed the amount, specified in said contract, for the total cost of the water system facilities exclusive of the costs attributable to the land of the installer. An amount attributable to interest may also be included in the contract, at a rate not to exceed 4 percent per annum from the date of installation to the date of connection of other land to the facilities.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20612.

Whenever a district has contracted to reimburse an installer for the installation of water system facilities, it may impose upon land and collect from any person owning the land, other than the land designated in the contract as proposed by the installer to be served therefrom, which may connect to and receive water service from or through said water system facilities, a reasonable charge representing the proportionate share of the estimated cost of replacement or the proportionate share of the total installation cost of said water system facilities which is fairly attributable to the land which may receive water service. An amount attributable to interest may be included in the charge at a rate not to exceed 4 percent per annum from the date of installation to the date of connection of other land to the facilities.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20613.

All charges collected under Section 20612 shall be paid into the treasury of the district and treated in the same manner as other water revenues, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and the reimbursement contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20614.

(a) The board of supervisors and the board of directors of the district, if any, may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the general manager or other district officer to order changes or additions in the work being performed under contracts made pursuant to this article in an amount not to exceed:

(1) For contracts whose original cost is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(2) For contracts whose original cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the
 amount of the change or addition shall not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract.

(3) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract that is in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). Notwithstanding subdivision (b), no change or addition shall exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(b) The County of Los Angeles may elect to be subject to all of the following provisions: 

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million dollars
 ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index. 

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding
 on the County of Los Angeles, and all existing protest and grievance procedures regarding that decision remain valid. 

(4) At the time the board delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the board shall implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision, subdivision (c) of Section 20142, subdivision (b) of Section 20395, subdivision (e) of Section 20405, and subdivision (b) of Section 20998, exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Los
 Angeles shall provide a review report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee on Governance and Finance no later than July 1, 2026.

(c) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 7.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.   See later operative version added by Sec. 8 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20614.

The board of supervisors and the board of directors of the district, if any, may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the general manager or other district officer to order changes or additions in the work being performed under contracts made pursuant to this article in an amount not to exceed:

(a) For contracts whose original cost is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(b) For contracts whose original cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the amount of the change or
 addition shall not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract.

(c) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract that is in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any change or addition exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(d) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2027.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 7) and added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 8.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------

20615.

(a) Contracts by the district for private architectural, landscape architectural, professional engineering, environmental, land surveying, and construction project management services may be let by the board or any officer authorized by the board pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 4525) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(b) Contracts by the district for special services, as provided in Section 31000 of the Government Code, may be let by the board or any officer authorized by the board pursuant to Section 31000 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2009, Ch. 332, Sec. 78.3.   (SB 113)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 38. County Drainage Districts [20620. - 20624.]

20620.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by county drainage districts, as provided for in the County Drainage District Act, Division 17 (commencing with Section 56000) of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20621.

Upon completion of the precise plans and specifications, the work or any portion of it may be done in any of the following ways as ordered by the district board:

(a) By purchasing the material and doing the work by day labor.

(b) By purchasing the material and letting a contract for the doing of the work.

(c) By purchasing only a portion or none of the material and letting a contract for furnishing the balance or all of the material and the doing of the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20622.

Any contract for the doing of the work and furnishing any or all of the material shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder submitting a sealed bid in response to a notice calling for bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20623.

The notice shall be published once a week for at least two successive weeks in a newspaper circulated in the county and shall refer to precise plans and specifications covering the work to be done and materials, if any, to be furnished. If the material to be purchased costs over one thousand dollars ($1,000), and there is no purchasing agent, the material shall be purchased from the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20624.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 39.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 39. Levee Districts [20630. - 20635.]

20630.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by levee districts, as provided for in the Levee District Law of 1959, Division 19 (commencing with Section 70000) of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20631.

Contracts in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for the construction or repair of any levees or associated works, unless the construction or repair is done under its own superintendence, shall be made pursuant to this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20632.

The board shall give notice by publication, pursuant to Section 6063 of the Government Code, in calling for bids for the construction or repair of any of the levees or associated works of the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20633.

The notice calling for bids shall contain:

(a) A statement that the plans and specifications of the construction or repairs may be seen at the district office.

(b) A particular description of the construction or repair advertised if less than the whole construction or repair is advertised.

(c) A statement that the board will receive sealed bids for the construction or repairs advertised or any portion of them designated by the board.

(d) A statement that the contract or contracts for the construction or repair advertised will be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders, but that any and all bids may be rejected.

(e) A statement of the time and place for opening the bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20633.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 40.)
-------------------------------------------

20634.

After opening the bids, and as convenient, the board shall award the contract or contracts for the construction or repair in portions, or as a whole, to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders, but the board may reject any and all bids and readvertise for proposals or may proceed to construct the works or any part thereof under its own superintendence.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20635.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 40. Municipal Water Districts [20640. - 20645.]

20640.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by municipal water districts, as provided for in the Municipal Water District Law of 1911, Division 20 (commencing with Section 71000) of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20641.

A district may prescribe methods for the construction of works and for the letting of contracts for any of the following purposes:

(a) The construction of works, structures or equipment.

(b) The performance or furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies, necessary or convenient for carrying out any of the purposes of this division.

(c) The acquisition or disposal of any real or personal property.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20642.

When work is not to be done by the district itself by force account, and the amount involved is thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000), or more, any contract for the doing of the work shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, after publication, in the manner prescribed by the board, of notices inviting bids therefor. However, the board may reject any and all proposals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20642.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 41.)
-------------------------------------------

20643.

Notwithstanding Section 20642, contracts, in writing or otherwise, for the acquisition or disposal of any real or personal property may be let without calling for competitive bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20644.

The board may, from time to time, establish the manner of calling for bids and letting contracts, but except as such procedure so established by the board otherwise requires, all contracts may be entered into upon such terms and in such manner as the board may authorize.

(History: Added by Stats. 1982, Ch. 465, Sec. 11.)
-------------------------------------------

20645.

In the case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 8.6.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 41. Community College Districts [20650. - 20662.]

20650.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by community college districts as provided for in Part 49 (commencing with Section 81000) of the Education Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 84.)
-------------------------------------------

20651.

(a) The governing board of any community college district shall let any contracts involving an expenditure of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for any of the following:

(1) The purchase of equipment, materials, or supplies to be furnished, sold, or leased to the district.

(2) Services, except construction services.

(3) Repairs, including maintenance as defined in Section 20656, that are not a public project as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002.

The contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder who shall give security as the board requires, or else reject all bids.

(b) The governing board shall let any contract for a public project, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 22002, involving an expenditure of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) or more to the lowest responsible bidder who shall give security as the board requires, or else reject all bids. All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(1) Cash.

(2) A cashier’s check made payable to the community college district.

(3) A certified check made payable to the community college district.

(4) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the community college district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(c) This section applies to all equipment, materials, or supplies, whether patented or otherwise. This section shall not apply to professional services or advice, insurance services, or any other purchase or service otherwise exempt from this section, or to any works done by day labor or by force account pursuant to Section 20655.

(d) Commencing January 1, 1997, the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges shall annually adjust the dollar amounts specified in subdivision (a) to reflect the percentage change in the annual average value of the Implicit Price Deflator for State and Local Government Purchases of Goods and Services for the United States, as published by the United States Department of Commerce for the 12-month period ending in the prior fiscal year. The annual adjustments shall be rounded to the nearest one hundred dollars ($100).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20651.2.

(a) Notwithstanding any other law, including, but not limited to, the advertising, bidding, and protest provisions of this article and Division 7 (commencing with Section 70900) of Title 3 of the Education Code, but subject to Section 88003.1, the governing board of a community college district may award a contract for the acquisition of goods, services, or information technology that has an estimated value of greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), to a certified small business, including a microbusiness, or to a disabled veteran business enterprise, if the community college district obtains price quotations from two or more certified small businesses,
 including microbusinesses, or from two or more disabled veteran business enterprises.

(b) In carrying out subdivision (a), a community college district shall consider a responsive offer timely received from a responsible certified small business, including a microbusiness, or from a disabled veteran business enterprise.

(c) The definitions set forth in Section 14837 of the Government Code apply to this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 2013, Ch. 262, Sec. 3.   (AB 173)   Effective January 1, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

20651.5.

(a) The governing board of any community college district may require each prospective bidder for a contract, as described under Section 20651, to complete and submit to the district a standardized questionnaire and financial statement in a form specified by the district, including a complete statement of the prospective bidder’s financial ability and experience in performing public works. The questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the bidder in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. The questionnaire responses of prospective bidders and their financial statements shall not be deemed public records and shall not be open to public inspection.

(b) Any community college district requiring prospective bidders to complete and submit questionnaires and financial statements, as described in subdivision (a), shall adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders on the basis of the completed questionnaires and financial statements, in order to determine the size of the contracts upon which each bidder shall be deemed financially qualified to bid. The prequalification of a prospective bidder shall neither limit nor preclude a district’s subsequent consideration of a prequalified bidder’s responsibility on factors other than the prospective bidder’s financial qualifications.

(c) Each prospective bidder on any contract described under Section 20651 that is subject to this section shall be furnished, by the community college district letting the contract, with a standardized proposal form that, when completed and executed, shall be submitted as his or her bid. Bids not presented on the forms so furnished shall be deemed nonresponsive and shall be rejected. A proposal form shall not be accepted from any person who, or other entity which, is required to submit a completed questionnaire and financial statement for prequalification pursuant to subdivision (a), but who or which has not done so at least five days prior to the date fixed for the public opening of sealed bids and has not been prequalified, pursuant to subdivision (b), at least one day prior to that date.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 657, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20651.7.

(a) For the purposes of bid evaluation and selection pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 20651, when a community college district determines that it can expect long-term savings through the use of life-cycle cost methodology, the use of more sustainable goods and materials, and reduced administrative costs, the community college district may provide for the selection of the lowest responsible bidder on the basis of best value pursuant to policies and procedures adopted by the governing board in accordance with this section.

(b) For purposes of this section, “best value” means the most advantageous balance of price, quality, service, performance, and other elements, as defined by the governing board, achieved through methods in accordance with this section and
 determined by objective performance criteria that may include price, features, long-term functionality, life-cycle costs, overall sustainability, and required services.

(c) A community college district shall consider all of the following when adopting best value policies pursuant to subdivision (a):

(1) Price and service level proposals that reduce the district’s overall operating costs, including end-of-life expenditures and impact.

(2) Equipment, services, supplies, and materials standards that support the community college district’s strategic acquisition and management program direction.

(3) A procedure for protest and resolution.

(d) A community college district may consider any of
 the following factors if adopting policies and procedures pursuant to subdivision (c):

(1) The total cost to the community college district of its purchase, use, and consumption of equipment, supplies, and materials.

(2) The operational cost or benefit incurred by the community college district as a result of a contract award.

(3) The added value to the community college district, as defined in the request for proposal, of vendor-added services.

(4) The quality and effectiveness of equipment, supplies, materials, and services.

(5) The reliability of delivery and installation schedules.

(6) The terms and conditions of product
 warranties and vendor guarantees.

(7) The financial stability of the vendor.

(8) The vendor’s quality assurance program.

(9) The vendor’s experience with the provisions of equipment, supplies, materials, and services within the institutional marketplace.

(10) The consistency of the vendor’s proposed equipment, supplies, materials, and services with the district’s overall supplies and materials procurement program.

(11) The economic benefits to the local community, including, but not limited to, job creation and retention.

(12) The environmental benefits to the local community.

(e) A community college district awarding a contract under this section shall award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder whose proposal is determined, in writing by the community college district, to be the best value to the community college district based solely on the criteria set forth in the request for proposal.

(f) The governing board of a community college district shall issue a written notice of intent to award supporting its contract award and stating in detail the basis of the award. The notice of the intent to award and the contract file must be sufficient to satisfy an external audit.

(g) The governing board of a community college district shall publicly announce its award, identifying the bidder to which the award is made, the price proposal of the contractor awarded the contract, and the overall
 combined rating on the request for proposal evaluation factors. The announcement shall also include the ranking of the contractor awarded the contract in relation to all other responsive bidders and their respective price proposals and summary of the rationale for the contract award.

(h) The community college district shall ensure that all businesses have a fair and equitable opportunity to compete for, and participate in, district contracts and shall also ensure that discrimination, as described in subdivision (e) of Section 12751.3 of the Public Utilities Code, in the award and performance of contracts does not occur.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 725, Sec. 2.   (AB 3186)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------

20652.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of Sections 81640 to 81654, inclusive, of the Education Code, or of Sections 20651 to 20659, inclusive, of this code, the governing board of any community college district without advertising for bids, and when that board has determined it to be in the best interests of the district, may authorize by contract, lease, requisition, or purchase order, any public corporation or agency, including any county, city, town, or district, to lease data-processing equipment, purchase materials, supplies, equipment, automotive vehicles, tractors, and other personal property for the district in the manner in which the public corporation or agency is authorized by law to make the leases or purchases. Upon receipt of any such personal property, provided the property complies with the
 specifications set forth in the contract, lease, requisition, or purchase order, the community college district may draw a warrant in favor of the public corporation or agency for the amount of the approved invoice, including the reasonable costs to the public corporation or agency for furnishing the services incidental to the lease or purchase of the personal property. Alternatively, if there is an existing contract between a public corporation or agency and a vendor for the lease or purchase of the personal property, a community college district may authorize the lease or purchase of the personal property directly from the vendor by contract, lease, requisition, or purchase order and make payment to the vendor under the same terms that are available to the public corporation or agency under the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2013, Ch. 726, Sec. 1.   (SB 681)   Effective January 1, 2014.)
-------------------------------------------

20653.

Nothing in this code shall preclude the governing board of any community college district from purchasing materials, equipment or supplies through the Department of General Services pursuant to Section 14814 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 84.)
-------------------------------------------

20653.5.

Nothing in this code shall preclude the governing board of a community college district from purchasing materials, equipment, supplies, or services under the same terms and conditions as are specified in a contract lawfully awarded by the University of California or the California State University.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 366, Sec. 3.   (AB 653)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

20654.

(a) In an emergency when any repairs, alterations, work, or improvement is necessary to any facility of the college, or to permit the continuance of existing college classes, or to avoid danger to life or property, the board may by unanimous vote, with the approval of the county superintendent of schools, do either of the following:

(1) Make a contract in writing or otherwise on behalf of the district for the performance of labor and furnishing of materials or supplies for the purpose without advertising for or inviting bids.

(2) Notwithstanding Section 20655, authorize the use of day labor or force account for the purpose.

(b) Nothing in this section shall eliminate the need for any bonds or security otherwise required by law.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20655.

(a) In each community college district, the governing board may make repairs, alterations, additions, or painting, repainting, or decorating upon school buildings, repair or build apparatus or equipment, make improvements on the school grounds, erect new buildings, and perform maintenance as defined in Section 20656 by day labor, or by force account, whenever the total number of hours on the job does not exceed 350 hours. Moreover, in any district whose number of full-time equivalent students is 15,000 or greater, the governing board may, in addition, make repairs to school buildings, grounds, apparatus, or equipment, including painting or repainting, and perform maintenance, as defined in Section 20656, by day labor or by force account whenever the total number of hours on the job does not exceed 750 hours, or when the cost of materials does not exceed twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000).

(b) For purposes of this section, day labor shall include the use of maintenance personnel employed on a permanent or temporary basis.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20656.

For purposes of Section 20655, “maintenance” means routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation, protection and keeping of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes in a safe and continually usable condition for which it was designed, improved, constructed, altered or repaired. “Facility” means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, or real property.

This definition of “maintenance” expressly includes, but is not limited to: carpentry, electrical, plumbing, glazing, and other craft work designed consistent with the definition set forth above to preserve the facility in a safe, efficient, and continually usable condition for which it was intended, including repairs, cleaning, and other operations on machinery and other equipment permanently attached to the building or realty as fixtures.

This definition does not include, among other types of work, janitorial or custodial services and protection of the sort provided by guards or other security forces.

It is the intent of the Legislature that this definition does not include painting, repainting, or decorating other than touchup, but instead it is the intent of the Legislature that such activities be controlled directly by the provisions of Section 20655.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 84.)
-------------------------------------------

20657.

It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any work, project, service, or purchase for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring contracting after competitive bidding.

The district shall maintain job orders or similar records indicating the total cost expended on each project in accordance with the procedures established in the most recent edition of the California Community College Budget and Accounting Manual for a period of not less than three years after completion of the project.

Informal bidding may be used on work, projects, services, or purchases that cost up to the limits set forth in this article. For the purpose of securing informal bids, the board shall publish annually in a newspaper of general circulation published in the district, or if there is no such newspaper, then in some newspaper in general circulation in the county, a notice inviting contractors to register to be notified of future informal bidding projects. All contractors included on the informal bidding list shall be given notice of all informal bid projects, in any manner as the district deems appropriate.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 897, Sec. 9.   Effective January 1, 1996.)
-------------------------------------------

20658.

The governing board of any community college district may by majority vote authorize its district superintendent, or such person as he or she may designate, to expend up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per transaction for work done, compensation for employees or consultants, and purchases of equipment, supplies, or materials. Ratification by the governing board shall not be required with respect to transactions entered into pursuant to this section. In the event of malfeasance in office, the district official invested by the governing board with authority to act under this section shall be personally liable for any and all moneys of the district paid out as a result of such malfeasance.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 84.)
-------------------------------------------

20659.

If any change or alteration of a contract governed by the provisions of this article is ordered by the governing board of the community college district, such change or alteration shall be specified in writing and the cost agreed upon between the governing board and the contractor. The board may authorize the contractor to proceed with performance of the change or alteration without the formality of securing bids, if the cost so agreed upon does not exceed the greater of:

(a) The amount specified in Section 20651 or 20655, whichever is applicable to the original contract; or

(b) Ten percent of the original contract price.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 84.)
-------------------------------------------

20660.

Perishable food stuffs and seasonal commodities needed in the operation of cafeterias and food services may be purchased by a community college district in accordance with rules and regulations for the purchase adopted by the governing board of that district, notwithstanding any provisions of this code in conflict with the rules and regulations.

(History: Added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1372, Sec. 707.)
-------------------------------------------

20661.

(a) The Chancellor of the California Community Colleges is authorized to enter into a contract on behalf of one or more community college districts, subject to the following restrictions:

(1) No district may be required to participate in any contract entered into pursuant to this section.

(2) The cost to each district that is a party to or a beneficiary of a contract entered into pursuant to this section must be lower than the cost the district could obtain through its standard contracting procedures. No contract for the procurement of goods or services may be made when a bid has been received by a participating district for the procurement of the same goods or services unless the contract would result in a lower price for the goods or services upon the same terms, conditions, and specifications.

(3) The state shall not incur any financial responsibility in connection with a contract entered into pursuant to this section.

(b) The Chancellor of the California Community Colleges is authorized to charge a fee, commission, or other charge to either or both of the following:

(1) Each provider of goods or services under a contract entered into pursuant to this section.

(2) Each community college district that the chancellor enters into a contract on behalf of pursuant to this section.

(c) On or before January 1, 2001, the Chancellor of the California Community Colleges shall report to the Legislature and the Governor on contracts entered into pursuant to this section and any resultant cost savings.

(d) The Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges shall adopt regulations to implement this section.

(History: Added by Stats. 1998, Ch. 1023, Sec. 6.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20662.

(a) The Chancellor of the California Community Colleges may enter into a contract or other agreement with the governing board of any community college district whereby the district performs services or acts as a fiscal agent on behalf of the California Community Colleges, without advertising for or inviting bids for contracts or other agreements that are no more than twenty million dollars ($20,000,000). For existing contracts or other agreements that the Chancellor of the California Community Colleges has entered into with the governing board of any community college district pursuant to this section, the contract or
 other agreement may be renewed without advertising for or inviting bids, regardless of the amount. This section shall apply only when the funds for the contract or agreement are in satisfaction of the state obligation to provide funding pursuant to Section 8 of Article XVI of the California Constitution.

(b) This section shall become inoperative on July 1, 2027, and, as of January 1, 2028, is repealed.

(History: Amended (as amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 54, Sec. 46) by Stats. 2024, Ch. 998, Sec. 35.   (AB 176)   Effective September 30, 2024.   Inoperative July 1, 2027, by its own provisions.    Repealed as of January 1, 2028, by its own provisions.    See later operative version amended by Sec. 36 of Stats. 2024, Ch. 998.)
-------------------------------------------

20662.

(a) The Chancellor of the California Community Colleges may enter into a contract or other agreement with the governing board of any community college district whereby the district performs services or acts as a fiscal agent on behalf of the California Community Colleges. This section shall apply only when the funds for the contract or agreement are in satisfaction of the state obligation to provide funding pursuant to Section 8 of Article XVI of the California Constitution.

(b) This section shall become operative on July 1,
 2027.

(History: Amended (as amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 54, Sec. 47) by Stats. 2024, Ch. 998, Sec. 36.   (AB 176)   Effective September 30, 2024.   Operative July 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 41.5. Job Order Contracting for Community College Districts [20665.20. - 20665.33.]

20665.20.

The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature, in enacting this article, to demonstrate an alternative and optional procedure for bidding of public works projects that is applicable only to community college districts. The Legislature has previously authorized the use of this alternative and optional procedure only for school districts.

(b) Districts should be able to utilize cost-effective options for the delivery of public works projects, in accordance with the national trend, which include authorizations in California, to allow public entities to utilize job order contracts as a project delivery method.

(c) The benefits of a job order contract project delivery system include accelerated completion of the projects, cost savings, and reduction of construction contracting complexity for the district.

(d) The job order contracting approach should be used for the purposes of reducing project cost and expediting project completion.

(e) The availability of job order contracting as a project delivery method will not preclude the use of traditional methods of project delivery if a traditional method results in higher cost savings.

(f) It is the intent of the Legislature that job order contracts be competitively bid and awarded to the bidders providing the most qualified responsive bids. It is further the intent of the Legislature that districts use the job order
 contract process pursuant to this article only if the district has entered into a project labor agreement that meets the requirements of Section 2500 for all its public works projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.21.

As used in this article: 

(a) “Adjustment factor” means the job order contractor’s competitively bid adjustment to the community college district’s prices as published in the unit price catalog.

(b) “Indefinite quantity” means one or more of the construction tasks listed in the unit price catalog.

(c) “Job order” means a firm, fixed priced, lump-sum order issued by the school district to a job order contractor for a definite project scope of work as compiled from the unit price catalog to be performed pursuant to a job order contract.

(d) “Job order contract” means a
 contract, awarded to a most qualified bidder as described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 20665.24, between the community college district and a licensed, bonded, and general liability insured contractor in which the contractor agrees to a fixed period, fixed-unit price, and indefinite quantity contract that provides for the use of job orders for public works or maintenance projects.

(e) “Job order contract technical specifications” means a book, published by the community college district, detailing the technical specifications with regard to quality of materials and workmanship to be used by the job order contractor in accomplishing the tasks listed in the unit price catalog.

(f) “Job order contractor” means a licensed, bonded, and general liability insured contractor awarded a job order contract.

(g) “Offer to perform work” means the job order contractor’s proposal for a specific job order.

(h) “Plans and specifications” means the unit price catalog and the job order contract technical specifications. The scope of work to be performed with a job order contract is potentially, but not necessarily, all the tasks published in the unit price catalog.

(i) “Project” means the specific requirements and work to be accomplished by the job order contractor in connection with an individual job order.

(j) “Project labor agreement” means an agreement that meets the requirements of Section 2500.

(k) “Project scope of work” means the document and related drawings, specifications, and writings referenced therein which together set forth the
 specific requirements and work to be accomplished by the job order contractor in connection with an individual job order.

(l) “Proposal” means the job order contractor prepared document quoting those construction tasks listed in the unit price catalog that the job order contractor requires to complete the project scope of work, together with the appropriate quantities of each task. The pricing of each task shall be accomplished by multiplying the construction task unit price by the proposed quantity and the contractor’s competitively bid adjustment factor. The proposal shall also contain a schedule for the completion of a specific project scope of work as requested by the community college district. The proposal may also contain approved drawings, work schedule, permits, or other documentation as the community college district may require for a specific job order. The proposal shall be certified as contract compliant by a reviewer independent
 of the contractor.

(m) “Public works” has the same meaning as in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(n) “Public works project” has the same meaning as “public project,” as defined in Section 22002.

(o) “Subcontractor” means any person, firm, or corporation, other than the employees of the job order contractor, who is bonded and general liability insured and who contracts to furnish labor, or labor and materials, at the worksite or in connection with a job order, whether directly or indirectly on behalf of the job order contractor.

(p) “Community college district” means any community college district.

(q) “Unit price catalog” means a book
 containing specific construction tasks and the unit prices to install or demolish that construction. The listed tasks shall be based on generally accepted industry standards and information, where available, for various items of work to be performed by the job order contractor. The prices shall include the cost of materials, labor, and equipment for performing the items of work. The prices shall not include overhead and profit. All unit prices shall be developed using local prevailing wages.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.22.

Provisions in this article only apply to community college districts that choose to utilize job order contracting. A community college district may utilize job order contracting, when permitted by this article, as an alternative to any contracting procedures that the community college district is otherwise authorized or required by law to use.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.23.

(a) A community college district may utilize job order contracting pursuant to this article only if the community college district has entered into a project labor agreement or agreements that will apply to all public works awarded through job order contracting and to all other public works of the community college district that exceed a monetary threshold set by the community college district until January 1, 2027, regardless of what contracting procedure is used to award that work.

(b) A community college district shall prepare an execution plan for all modernization projects that may be eligible for job order contracting pursuant to this article. The community college district shall select from that plan a sufficient number of projects to be initiated as job
 order contracts during each calendar year and shall determine for each selected project that job order contracting will reduce the total cost of that project. Job order contracting shall not be used if the community college district finds that it will increase the total cost of the project.

(c) (1) An entity awarded a job order contract in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall provide an enforceable commitment to the community college district that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the job order contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the job order contract is subject to a project labor agreement that
 will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the job order contract to use a skilled and trained workforce to perform the job order contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 303, Sec. 1.   (AB 846)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.24.

Bidding for job order contracts shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) A community college district shall prepare a set of documents for job order contracts. The documents shall include a unit price catalog and preestablished unit prices, job order contract technical specifications, and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the community college district’s needs.

(2) Any architect, engineer, consultant, or contractor retained by the community college district to assist in the development of the job order contract documents shall not be eligible to bid or to participate in the preparation
 of a bid with any job order contractor.

(b) Based on the documents prepared under subdivision (a), a community college district shall prepare a request for bid that invites prequalified job order contractors to submit competitive sealed bids in the manner prescribed by the community college district.

(1) (A) The prequalified job order contractors, as determined by a community college district, shall bid one or more adjustment factors to the unit prices listed in the unit price catalog based on the job order contract technical specifications. Awards shall be made to the prequalified bidders that the community college district determines to be the most qualified based upon preestablished criteria made by a community college district. The prequalified bidders shall
 be in compliance with a community college district’s project labor agreement.

(B) Compliance shall constitute no more than three major violations on any community college district projects within the last three years. If a contractor has more than three violations within a three-year period of time, the community college district shall seek administrative review of the violations. Violations will include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Failure to register core workers with the appropriate building trade union.

(ii) Failure to assign apprentices in accordance with Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code.

(iii) Failure to comply with subdivision (c) of
 Section 20665.25.

(iv) Incorrect assignment of work in accordance with the community college district’s project labor agreement.

(2) The community college district may award multiple job order contracts through a request for bid. Job order contracts shall be awarded to the most qualified prequalified bidders described in this subdivision.

(3) The request for bids may encourage the participation of local construction firms and the use of local subcontractors.

(c) (1) A community college district shall establish a procedure to prequalify job order contractors using a standard questionnaire that includes, at a minimum, the issues covered by the
 standardized questionnaire and model guidelines for rating bidders developed by the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 20101. This questionnaire shall require information including, but not limited to, all of the following:

(A) If the job order contractor is a partnership, limited partnership, or other association, a listing of all of the partners or association members known at the time of bid submission who will participate in the job order contract.

(B) Evidence that the members of the job order contractor have the capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage the construction of the project, as well as a financial
 statement that assures the community college district that the job order contractor has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to perform construction, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the job order contractor has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding and liability insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history, worker safety programs, and apprenticeship programs.

(F) A full disclosure regarding all of the following that
 are applicable:

(i) Any serious or willful violation of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the job order contractor.

(ii) Any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project.

(iii) Any instance where the job order contractor, or its owners, officers, or managing employees submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive, or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(iv) Any instance where the job order contractor,
 or its owners, officers, or managing employees defaulted on a construction contract.

(v) Any violations of the Contractors’ State License Law (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), excluding alleged violations of federal or state law regarding the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or of Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) withholding requirements settled against any member of the job order contractor.

(vi) Any bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the job order contractor, including, but not limited to, information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(vii) Any settled adverse
 claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the job order contractor during the five years preceding submission of a bid under this article, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this period.

(G) In the case of a partnership or any association that is not a legal entity, a copy of the agreement creating the partnership or association and specifying that all partners or association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the job order contract.

(2) The information required under this subdivision shall be verified under oath by the entity and its members in the manner in which
 civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information that is not a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 28, Sec. 131.   (SB 1380)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.25.

(a) The maximum total dollar amount that may be awarded under a single job order contract shall not exceed five million dollars ($5,000,000) in the first term of the job order contract and, if extended or renewed pursuant to subdivision (b), a maximum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) over the subsequent two terms of the job order contract.

(b) Job order contracts may be executed for an initial contract term of no more than 12 months, with the option of extending or renewing the job order contract for two 12-month periods. The term of the job order contract shall be for the contract term or whenever the maximum value of the contract is achieved, whichever is less. All extensions or renewals shall be priced as provided in the request for
 bids. The extension or renewal shall be mutually agreed to by the community college district and the job order contractor.

(c) The community college district may issue job orders to the job order contractor that has been awarded the job order contract. The job order issued to the job order contractor shall not commence for seven days from the time the job order was issued and the job order contractor shall provide a minimum of seven days’ notice for the addition of any subcontractor or substitution of any subcontractor as described in subdivision (e) of Section 20665.26. The job order shall be based on a project scope of work prepared by the community college district as well as a proposal from the job order contractor who is awarded the job order contract. No single job order may exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000).

(d) The amounts specified in subdivisions (a) and (c) shall
 be adjusted on January 1, 2018, as if this section was operative beginning January 1, 2004, to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index, and shall be adjusted each January 1 thereafter to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(e) It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller job orders any project for the purpose of evading the cost limitation provisions of this article.

(f) All work performed under the job order contract shall be covered by a project labor agreement.

(g) Any change or alteration to a job order shall be in compliance with Section 20118.4.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.26.

(a) All work bid under the job order contract shall comply with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 and is subject to all of the penalties and provisions set forth in that chapter.

(b) For purposes of this article, if the primary job order contractor chooses to use subcontractors, the primary job order contractor is required to verify that the subcontractors possess the appropriate licenses and credentials required to perform construction.

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the primary job order contractor may use subcontractors that are not listed at the time the job order is issued if the work to be performed under that job order is less than ten thousand
 dollars ($10,000).

(d) If the primary job order contractor chooses to use a subcontractor that is not listed at the time of bid to perform work on a job order, all of the following apply:

(1) The primary job order contractor shall provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted by trade. The public notice shall include the scope of work; the project location; the name, address, and the telephone number of the primary job order contractor; and the closing date, time, and location for sealed bids to be submitted.

(2) The primary job order contractor shall take sealed bids from the subcontractors solicited for the proposal. These bids shall be publicly opened at a prescribed time and place by the primary job order contractor. After the bids are opened, the job order contractor shall notify the
 community college district which subcontractor was selected.

(3) The notification shall include every subcontractor for all tiers and shall establish the authorized subcontractor list for the job order. Work shall not commence prior to seven days’ notice of the established subcontractor list and the subsequent addition of any subcontractor to the job order.

(4) The notification shall identify the scope of the work to be performed by each subcontractor to the job order, broken down by craft. If a subcontractor performs multiple crafts, the job order contractor shall identify the work of each craft to be performed.

(e) If the primary job order contractor chooses to make a substitution to the subcontractor list, the primary job order contractor shall provide a minimum of seven days’ notice to the community college
 district along with justification as to the need for the substitution. The community college district may request a hearing to evaluate the substitution request, which shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(f) If the community college district determines that there has been a violation of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1, including bid shopping by the primary job order contractor, the community college district may terminate the job order or the contractor may lose authorization to proceed with awarded work subject to the community college district’s administrative due process review, if that review is established pursuant to the community college district’s project labor agreement. If the community college district determines that a job order contractor has violated any provision set forth in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1, the community college district may
 declare the contractor ineligible for future job orders and may result in a loss of prequalification status for a period of time to be determined by the community college district.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.27.

(a) A job order contract shall set forth in the general conditions of the job order contract the party or parties responsible for seeing that the provisions of Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code are complied with.

(b) For purposes of job order contracting, prevailing wages when required to be paid shall apply to all work ordered under the job order contract regardless of thresholds set forth in Section 1771.5 of the Labor Code.

(c) The job order contractor shall pay the prevailing wage in effect at the time the job order is issued by the community college district and all increases as published by the Department of
 Industrial Relations for the term of the job order contract, including all overtime, holiday, and shift provisions published by the Department of Industrial Relations.

(d) The community college district shall designate one individual to act as a monitor to inspect job sites for labor compliance violations at the request of the designated labor representative in its project labor agreement.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.28.

A willful violation of Section 20665.26 occurs when the job order contractor or subcontractor knew or reasonably should have known of his or her obligations under the public works law and deliberately fails or refuses to comply with its provisions. The community college district using job order contracting shall publish and distribute to the Labor Commissioner a list of all job order contractors or subcontractors who violate this provision and the community college district shall not award a job order contract or any future job orders under an existing job order contract to any contractor or subcontractor who violates this provision during the effective period of debarment of the contractor or subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.29.

For purposes of employment of apprentices on job order contracts, when the individual job order involves more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) or 20 working days, all general contractors or subcontractors shall at all times be in compliance with Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code and shall comply with the following:

(a) Prior to commencing work on an individual job order, every contractor shall submit job order award information to an applicable apprenticeship program that can supply apprentices to the site of the job order. The information submitted shall include an estimate of the journeyman hours to be performed under the contract, the number of apprenticeships proposed to be employed, and the approximate dates the apprentices would be employed. A copy of
 this information shall also be submitted to the awarding agency if requested by the awarding agency.

(b) The ratio of work performed by apprentices to journeymen employed in a particular craft or trade on the job order may be no higher than the ratio stipulated in the apprenticeship standard under which the apprenticeship program operates where the job order contractor agrees to be bound by those standards but, except as otherwise provided in Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code, in no case shall the ratio be less than one hour of apprenticeship work for every five hours of journeyman work.

(c) Every apprentice employed under the job order contract shall be paid the prevailing rate of per diem wages for apprentices in the trade to which he or she is registered and shall be employed only at the work of the craft or trade to which he or she is registered.

(d) Every apprentice employed under the job order contract shall be hired from the local joint labor management apprenticeship committee that has jurisdiction in the geographic area of the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.30.

A job order contractor or subcontractor that knowingly violates the provisions involving employment of apprentices shall forfeit as a civil penalty an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for each full calendar day of noncompliance. The amount of this penalty shall be based on consideration of whether the violation was a good faith mistake due to inadvertence. A contractor or subcontractor that knowingly commits a second or subsequent violation of the provisions involving employment of apprentices within a three-year period where the noncompliance results in apprenticeship training not being provided as required, shall forfeit as a civil penalty a sum of not more than three hundred dollars ($300) for each full calendar day of noncompliance and shall not be awarded any further job orders under the job order contract
 and shall be precluded for a period of one year from bidding on any future job order contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.31.

In order to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse, a community college district adopting job order contracting shall do all of the following:

(a) Prepare for each individual job order developed under a job order contract an independent community college district estimate. The estimate will be prepared prior to the receipt of the contractor’s offer to perform work and will be compared to the contractor’s proposed price to determine the reasonableness of that price before issuance of any job order. The basis for any adjustments to the community college district estimate is to be documented. If the contractor’s proposal for a given job order is found to be unreasonable, not cost effective, or undesirable, the community college district is under no obligation to issue the
 job order to the job order contractor, and may instead utilize any other available procurement procedures.

(b) The community college district shall not issue a job order until the job order has been reviewed and approved by the appropriate level of management.

(c) Once a job order has been issued, all documents pertaining to preparation and approval of the job order, including the independent community college district estimate, shall be available for public review.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.32.

A community college district that adopts the job order contracting process shall also adopt a payment resolution process which may include, but not be limited to, the convening of a payment resolution committee.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 1.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20665.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20665.33.

This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 303, Sec. 2.   (AB 846)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.   Note: Termination date applies to Article 41.5, commencing with Section 20665.20.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 42. Public Entities—Public Work and Public Purchases [20670. - 20676.]

20670.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by public entities as provided for in Division 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 85.)
-------------------------------------------

20671.

As used in this chapter:

(a) “Public leaseback” means any lease by a public entity, as lessee, of buildings, structures, or other facilities which are permanently attached to land, where the lease is between the public entity and a public leaseback corporation, as lessor, and the lease is executed before the buildings, structures, or facilities have been built.

(b) “Public entity” means any city, charter city, city and county, county, district, public corporation, or political subdivision of the state.

(c) “Public leaseback corporation” means any corporation or nonprofit corporation organized or controlled by a public entity which constructs or arranges for the construction of buildings, structures, or other facilities which are permanently attached to land for public leaseback.

(d) “Public projects” means the construction of buildings, structures, or other facilities which are permanently attached to land.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 85.)
-------------------------------------------

20672.

Any public project by a public leaseback corporation in excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000) shall be constructed under contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, and such contract shall require the payment of prevailing wages as determined by the public leaseback corporation in the manner and form provided in Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 85.)
-------------------------------------------

20673.

For the purpose of securing bids, the public leaseback corporation shall give notice of the time and place for opening bids to prospective bidders by publication once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the jurisdiction in which the land is located, or if located in more than one jurisdiction, in such a newspaper in a jurisdiction in which a major portion of the project is to be done. If there is no such newspaper, then publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation circulating in the jurisdiction.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 85.)
-------------------------------------------

20674.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the public entity.

(c) A certified check made payable to the public entity.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the public entity.

Any bid may be withdrawn at any time prior to the time fixed in the public notice for the opening of bids by written request for the withdrawal of the bid filed with the public leaseback corporation. The request shall be executed by the bidder or the bidder’s duly authorized representative. The withdrawal of a bid does not prejudice the right of the bidder to submit a new bid. Whether or not bids are opened exactly at the time fixed in the public notice for opening bids, a bid shall not be received after that time.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the public entity beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 43.)
-------------------------------------------

20675.

If the public leaseback corporation deems the acceptance of the lowest responsible bid is not in the best interests of the public entity the public leaseback corporation may reject all bids and advertise for other bids in the manner required by this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 85.)
-------------------------------------------

20676.

A contractor or a mining operator shall not sell any sand, gravel, or other minerals, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 10295.5, to a local agency, unless the operation is not subject to the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 2710) of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code), or unless the contractor or mining operator certifies, under penalty of perjury, that the minerals are from a mining operation identified in the list published pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 2717 of the Public Resources Code.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 869, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 43. Community Services Districts [20680. - 20683.]

20680.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by community services districts as provided for in the Community Services District Law pursuant to Division 3 (commencing with Section 61000) of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 86.)
-------------------------------------------

20682.

(a) A district may purchase materials and supplies for the construction or completion of any building, structure, or improvements in the open market when the cost does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(b) Contracts for materials and supplies for the construction or completion of any building, structure, or improvement, when the cost exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses.

(c) The district shall publish a notice inviting bids for any contract for which competitive bidding is required at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the district at least one week before the time specified for receiving bids. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for opening the bids and distinctly state the materials and supplies to be purchased.

(d) If the general manager recommends and the board of directors determines that the publication of advertisements of the notice in trade journals and papers in lieu of publication pursuant to subdivision (c) will increase the number of business enterprises receiving that notice, the board of directors may by resolution declare that those notices shall be published in trade journals and papers at least 10 days prior to the time specified for receiving bids.

(e) At its discretion, the board of directors may reject any bids presented and readvertise.

(f) In the case of an emergency, the board of directors may act pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(g) As an alternate to the procedures required by this section, a district may rely on the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000) of Part 3 of Division 2.

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 249, Sec. 5.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

20682.5.

(a) A district may construct or complete any building, structure, or improvement with its own forces or by contract without bidding when the cost does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(b) All contracts for the construction or completion of any building, structure, or improvement, when the cost exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses.

(c) The district shall publish a notice inviting bids for any contract for which
 competitive bidding is required at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the district at least 10 days before the time specified for receiving bids. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for opening the bids and distinctly state the work to be done.

(d) If the general manager recommends and the board of directors determines that the publication of advertisements of the notice in trade journals and papers in lieu of publication pursuant to subdivision (c) will increase the number of business enterprises receiving that notice, the board of directors may by resolution declare that those notices shall be published in trade journals and papers at least 10 days prior to the time specified for receiving bids.

(e) If plans and specifications are prepared describing the work, all bidders shall be afforded an opportunity to examine the plans and specifications, and the
 plans and specifications shall be attached to and become part of the contract, if one is awarded.

(f) At its discretion, the board of directors may reject any bids presented and readvertise.

(g) In the case of an emergency, the board of directors may act pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(h) The board of directors may, subject to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, require the posting of those bonds it deems desirable as a condition to the filing of a bid or the letting of a contract.

(i) The district shall keep cost records of the work in the manner provided in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(j) As an alternate to the procedures required by this section, a district may rely on the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000) of Part 3 of Division 2.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 51.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20683.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 20685.5 by Stats. 2005, Ch. 249, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 43.1. Redevelopment Agencies [20688.1. - 20688.4.]

20688.1.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts awarded by entities as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 33000) of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 51.5.)
-------------------------------------------

20688.2.

Any work of grading, clearing, demolition, or construction undertaken by the agency shall be done by contract after competitive bids if the cost of that work exceeds the amount specified in Section 20162, as that section presently exists or may be hereafter amended. With respect to work of grading, clearing, demolition, or construction that is not in excess of that amount, the agency may contract the work without competitive bids, and in contracting the work may give priority to the residents of the redevelopment project areas and to persons displaced from
 those areas as a result of redevelopment activities.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 552.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20688.25.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the local agency.

(c) A certified check made payable to the local agency.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the agency.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the local agency beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 45.)
-------------------------------------------

20688.3.

(a) To the greatest extent feasible, opportunities for training and employment arising from any contract for work to be performed in connection with any redevelopment project shall be given to the lower income residents of the project area.

(b) An agency with a resident population of less than 1,000 persons in its territorial jurisdiction, and with a secured assessed valuation of not more than thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) as shown on the 1978–79 assessment roll, may, by contract, obligate lessees and purchasers of real property acquired in a redevelopment
 project and owners of property improved as part of a redevelopment project to give preference to training and employment, in businesses to be conducted on the property, to residents of the project area upon such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon. In the event that there is an agreement between the employer and a labor organization which restricts the employer’s ability to employ project area residents, then such labor organization shall give preference as to entry into the particular labor organization, and with respect to employment in a business on the property, to residents of the project area otherwise qualified.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 51.5.)
-------------------------------------------

20688.4.

An agency shall require each successful bidder to file with it good and sufficient bonds, to be approved by it. The bonds shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material in connection with the contract. The bonds shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and are subject to the provisions of that chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 52.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 44. County Harbor Commissions [20690. - 20696.]

20690.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by county harbor commissions as provided for in Division 7 (commencing with Section 4000) of the Harbors and Navigation Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 87.)
-------------------------------------------

20693.

The commission may do all the work of improvement, development, or protection under one contract, or it may segregate it into separate parts or divisions, and let contracts for any one or more separate parts or divisions.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 87.)
-------------------------------------------

20694.

Each contract for doing any part of the work shall be let after advertisement for bids by publishing notice for at least 10 days in one or more daily newspapers published in the county. If there is no daily paper published in the county, notice shall be given by three publications in a weekly paper published therein.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 87.)
-------------------------------------------

20694.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the commission.

(c) A certified check made payable to the commission.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the commission.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the commission beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 46.)
-------------------------------------------

20695.

Each contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, who shall give such security as the commission requires for the full and faithful performance of the contract. The amount and kind of security required shall be stated in the advertisement for bids.

The board may authorize the commission to make contracts without advertising for bids for any part of the work, the cost of which does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500).

The commission may reject any and all bids, and readvertise for bids for doing the whole or any part of the work, or the commission may, with the approval of the board, purchase material, hire or purchase machinery, apparatus or appliances and employ labor and do the work or any part thereof without readvertising for bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 87.)
-------------------------------------------

20696.

All improvement, development or protection of any harbor done under this article shall be of a substantial and permanent character.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 87.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 45. Harbor Improvement Districts [20710. - 20710.]

20710.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by harbor improvement districts as provided for in Part 2 (commencing with Section 5800) of Division 8 of the Harbors and Navigation Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 88.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 46. Harbor Districts [20720. - 20724.]

20720.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by harbor districts as provided for in Part 3 (commencing with Section 6000) of Division 8 of the Harbors and Navigation Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 89.)
-------------------------------------------

20723.

All work authorized to be done under this article, exceeding in cost the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be awarded upon competitive bidding, except that work consisting solely of new construction is required to be awarded upon competitive bidding only if it exceeds in cost the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000). Notice of the proposed letting of such a contract shall be given by advertisement for a period of two weeks or published pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code, in a newspaper of general circulation, published, printed, and circulated, in the district. The board may authorize additional publication in other newspapers of general circulation in the district when it deems that such publication would best serve the public interest. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.

The board may, without advertising for bids, negotiate with the government of the United States for the purpose of assisting the board in the performance of any of the work authorized by this article, and the board may contribute to the United States all or any portion of the estimated cost of any work authorized by this part which is to be done by or under contract with the United States.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 89.)
-------------------------------------------

20724.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 47.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 47. Small Craft Harbor Districts [20730. - 20737.]

20730.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by small craft harbor districts as provided for in the Small Craft Harbor District Law pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 8 of the Harbors and Navigation Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 90.)
-------------------------------------------

20736.

(a) All construction authorized under this article that exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) shall be awarded upon competitive bidding. Notice of the proposed letting of such a contract shall be published pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the district or, if there is none, of general circulation in the county, the first publication to be at least two weeks prior to the opening of bids. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In its discretion, the board may reject any bids presented and readvertise. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the board may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the board may have the work done directly by purchasing the materials and hiring the labor.

(b) If all bids are rejected, the board may adopt a resolution, by four-fifths vote, declaring that the work can be performed more economically by hiring day labor, or that the materials or supplies can be furnished at a lower price in the open market, and may have the work done in the manner stated in the resolution in order to take advantage of this lower cost.

(c) If there is an emergency, the board may, by four-fifths vote adopt a resolution declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and expend any sum required in the emergency without submitting the expenditure to the bidding procedure set forth. If notice for bid to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(d) The board may negotiate with the government of the United States or any department or agency thereof, the state or any department or agency thereof, or any local public agency for the purpose of assisting the district in the performance of any of the work authorized by this article and, without advertising for bids, may cause the district to contribute to the United States, the State of California, or any local public agency all or any portion of the estimated cost of any work authorized by this article which is to be done by or under contract with the United States, the State of California, or any local public agency.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 643, Sec. 27.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20737.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 48.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 48. Port Districts [20750. - 20753.]

20750.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by port districts as provided in Part 4 (commencing with Section 6200) of Division 8 of the Harbors and Navigation Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 91.)
-------------------------------------------

20751.

Contracts for the doing of new construction work, the cost of which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the purchasing of supplies, the cost of which exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or projects involving maintenance of buildings and improvements, the cost of which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be let by the board upon competitive bidding.

Notice of the proposed letting of contract shall be given by publication pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code in the county in which the district is located, at least five days before the time fixed for opening bids. Bidding shall be by sealed proposals filed with the district, upon forms furnished by it, and under such rules and regulations as the board may prescribe. All bids shall be publicly opened and declared under procedures established by the board, and the award of the contract shall be made in open session of the board to the lowest and best responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 56.5.)
-------------------------------------------

20751.1.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a four-fifths vote of all of its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend any sum or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in the emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or notice. If notice for bid to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 11.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20751.2.

Notwithstanding Section 20751, the board of the Ventura Port District may award a contract for the performance of dredging work within the district’s boundaries without competitive bidding, provided that both of the following apply:

(a) The dredging contractor was selected through a federal competitive bidding process for a federal dredging project then underway in the County of Ventura.

(b) The board makes written findings, based on substantial evidence in the record, that the contract awarded pursuant to this section is likely to cost less than a contract awarded pursuant to Section
 20751.

(History: Added by Stats. 2012, Ch. 51, Sec. 1.   (AB 482)   Effective January 1, 2013.)
-------------------------------------------

20752.2.

Notwithstanding Section 20751, all bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 49.)
-------------------------------------------

20753.

The board may delegate to its officers the execution of contracts in which the amount involved is less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1984, Ch. 8, Sec. 4.   Effective February 8, 1984.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 49. River Port Districts [20760. - 20764.]

20760.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by river port districts as provided for in Part 6 (commencing with Section 6800) of Division 8 of the Harbors and Navigation Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 92.)
-------------------------------------------

20761.

Contracts for the doing of new construction work, the cost of which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the purchasing of supplies, the cost of which exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or projects involving maintenance of buildings and improvements, the cost of which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be let by the board upon competitive bidding.

Notice of the proposed letting of a contract shall be given by publication pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code in the county in which the district is located, at least five days before the time fixed for opening bids. Bidding shall be by sealed proposals filed with the district upon forms furnished by it, and under such rules and regulations as the board may prescribe. All bids shall be publicly opened and declared under procedures established by the board, and the award of the contracts shall be made in open session of the board to the lowest and best responsible bidder. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise in its discretion.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 57.5.)
-------------------------------------------

20761.5.

Notwithstanding Section 20761, all bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 50.)
-------------------------------------------

20762.

In case of an emergency such as a fire, flood, storm, or other disaster, the board may, by resolution passed by the vote of four-fifths of all members, declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of district money to safeguard life, health, or property expend such sums as may be necessary in the emergency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 92.)
-------------------------------------------

20764.

The board may delegate to its officers the execution of contracts, in which the amount involved is less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1984, Ch. 8, Sec. 6.   Effective February 8, 1984.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 50. Sanitation Districts [20780. - 20784.]

20780.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by sanitation districts as provided for in the County Sanitation District Act pursuant to Division 5 (commencing with Section 4700) of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 93.)
-------------------------------------------

20782.

A district may make and perform any agreement with any public or private corporation of any kind or any person for the joint construction, acquisition, disposition, or operation of any property or works of a kind which might be constructed, acquired, disposed of, or operated by the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 93.)
-------------------------------------------

20783.

When work is done by the district itself by force account, the amount shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000). When the expenditure required for the work exceeds thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000), it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the district, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the district that have been designated by the district board as the places for posting this notice. The notice shall distinctly state the work to be done.

In its discretion, the district board may reject any bids presented and readvertise. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the district board may have the work done without further bid.

If all bids are rejected, the district board, on a resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote, may declare that the work can be performed more economically by day labor, or the materials or supplies furnished at a lower price in the open market and may have the work done in a manner stated in the resolution in order to take advantage of this lower cost.

If there is a present or anticipated great public calamity, including an extraordinary fire, flood, storm, or other disaster the district board may, by resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote declaring that the public interest and necessity demand immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, expend any sum required in the emergency without submitting the expenditure to bid.

Cost records of the work shall be kept in the manner provided in Sections 4000 to 4007, inclusive, of the Government Code.

This section shall not apply to sewerage maintenance, repair work, or to any uncompleted works under construction by district forces prior to the enactment of this section, and shall not be construed to exempt any work from Part 7 (commencing with Section 1720) of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 7.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20784.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 51.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 51. Sewer Maintenance Districts [20790. - 20793.]

20790.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by sewer maintenance districts as provided for in the Sewer Maintenance District Act pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4860) of Part 3 of Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 94.)
-------------------------------------------

20791.

“Maintenance of sewers” as used in this chapter includes the extension and enlargement of sewers, within a district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 94.)
-------------------------------------------

20793.

The district may contract with the federal government of the United States or any branch thereof, or with any county, city and county, municipal corporation, district or other public corporation or with any person, firm or corporation, for the joint acquisition or construction or use of any sewer or sewers or other works or facilities for the handling, treatment, or disposal of sewage or industrial waste from the district and such other area as may be designated in said contract, when, in the judgment of the legislative body of said district, it is for the best interests of the district so to do. Any such contract may provide for the construction and maintenance of such sewer or sewers, or such other works or facilities, and for the payment by or for the parties thereto of such proportionate part of the cost of the acquisition, construction or maintenance of such sewer or sewers or other works or facilities as may be stated in said contract, the payments to be made at such times and in such amounts as may be provided by said contract. Any such contract may provide for the joint use of any sewer or sewers, works or facilities for the handling, treatment or disposal of sewage or industrial waste upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the parties thereto, and for the flowage, treatment or disposal of sewage or industrial waste from such area for each of the parties thereto as may be described in the contract.

Any district which has acquired or constructed or which proposes to acquire or construct, any sewer or sewers, or works or other facilities for the handling, treatment or disposal of sewage or industrial waste, may contract with the federal government of the United States or any branch thereof, or with any county, city and county, municipal corporation, district or other public corporation or with any person, firm or corporation for the use of any such sewer or sewers, works or facilities by any such county, city and county, municipal corporation, district or other public corporation, or for the flowage, treatment or disposal of sewage or industrial waste from any area designated by such person, firm or corporation so contracting, upon such terms and conditions as may be provided in said contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 94.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 52. Sanitary Districts [20800. - 20806.]

20800.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by sanitary districts as provided in the Sanitary District Act of 1923 pursuant to Division 6 (commencing with Section 6400) of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20801.

“District project,” as used in this article, means any construction, reconstruction, alteration, enlargement, renewal, or replacement of sewer facilities which the district is authorized to do, including, but not limited to, the furnishing of supplies or materials for any such work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20803.

When the expenditure required for a district project exceeds fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice, subject to Section 20805.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 8.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

20804.

The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, circulated within the district, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the district that have been designated by resolution as the places for posting public notices. The notice shall distinctly state the project to be done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20804.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 52.)
-------------------------------------------

20805.

In its discretion, the district board may reject any bids presented and readvertise. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received the district board may have the project done without further complying with this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20806.

If there is an emergency, or if it is necessary to do emergency work to prepare for national or local defense, the district board may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of district funds to safeguard life, health, or property. Upon adoption of the resolution, it may expend any sum required in the emergency without complying with this article. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 12.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 53. Fire Protection Districts [20810. - 20813.]

20810.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by fire protection districts as provided for in the Fire Protection District Law pursuant to Division 12 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 96.)
-------------------------------------------

20811.

When a district board determines that it is in the public interest, a district may contract with any other public agency for fire protection services, rescue services, emergency medical services, hazardous material emergency response services, ambulance services, and any other emergency services for the protection of lives and property.

(History: Added by Stats. 1987, Ch. 1013, Sec. 12.)
-------------------------------------------

20812.

(a) A district board may contract for special services. These contracts shall be with persons specially trained, experienced, expert, and competent to perform the special services. The special services shall be limited to the fields of accounting, administration, ambulance, architecture, custodial, economics, engineering, finance, insurance, labor relations, law, maintenance, mechanics, medicine, planning, science, technology, and other services which are incidental to the operation of the district.

(b) In the case of a district which has a final budget in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000), the district shall follow the contracting and purchasing procedures which apply to the county government of its principal county or the procedures in subdivision (c).

(c) In the case of a district which has a final budget less than one million dollars ($1,000,000), the district shall follow the procedures of this subdivision.

(1) When the expenditure required for the service contract exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses.

(2) The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, at least five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the district, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the district. The notice shall distinctly state the service to be performed.

(3) The district board may reject any bids. If the district board rejects all bids, it may either readvertise or adopt a resolution, by two-thirds vote, declaring that the service can be performed more economically by the district’s employees or obtained at a lower price in the open market. Upon adoption of the resolution, the district board may undertake the service contract without further complying with this section.

(4) If no bids are received, the district board may undertake the service contract without further complying with this section.

(5) In the case of an emergency, the district board shall respond to the emergency pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050) if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 261, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20813.

(a) All contracts for the construction or completion of any building, structure, or improvement, when the expenditure required for the work exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses.

(b) The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the district, or if there is none, it
 shall be posted in at least three public places in the district. The notice shall distinctly state the work to be done.

(c) In its discretion, the district board may reject any bids presented and readvertise.

(d) In the case of an emergency, the district board may act pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(e) The district board may, subject to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, require the posting of those bonds it deems desirable as a condition to the filing of a bid or the letting of a contract.

(f) Cost records of the work shall be kept in the manner provided in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government
 Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 53.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 53.5. Recreation and Park Districts [20815. - 20815.5.]

20815.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by recreation and park districts as provided in the Recreation and Park District Law, Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 5780) of Division 5 of the Public Resources Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2001, Ch. 15, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------

20815.1.

(a) All contracts for new construction estimated to cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding.

(b) All contracts for alterations, maintenance, or repairs estimated to cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding.

(c) All contracts for materials and supplies not related to new construction, alterations, maintenance, or repairs estimated to cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after competitive bidding.

(d) A district may purchase in the open market without calling for bids, materials and supplies estimated to cost less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) for use in the work either under contract or by force account.

(History: Added by Stats. 2001, Ch. 15, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------

20815.3.

(a) A district shall publish notice inviting bids for any contract for which competitive bidding is required at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the district at least one week before the time specified for receiving bids. The notice shall distinctly state the work to be done.

(b) In its discretion, the board of directors may do any of the following:

(1) Reject all bids and readvertise.

(2) By a four-fifths vote, elect to purchase the materials or supplies in the open market.

(3) By a four-fifths vote, elect to construct the building, structure, or improvement by force account.

(c) In the case of an emergency, the board of directors may act pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(d) The board of directors may, subject to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, require the posting of those bonds it deems as a condition to the filing of a bid or the letting of a contract.

(e) The district shall keep cost records of the work pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 5 of Title 1 of the Government Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 54.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20815.5.

Notwithstanding Sections 20815.1 and 20815.3, a district may use the provisions of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000).

(History: Added by Stats. 2001, Ch. 15, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2002.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 54. Public Entities—Community Facilities Law of 1911 [20820. - 20826.]

20820.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by public entities as provided for in the Community Facilities Law of 1911 pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4600) of Part 3 of Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 97.)
-------------------------------------------

20823.

Any contract for the construction of any improvement may be let and entered into as other contracts for similar work are let and entered into by the city. If the improvement includes the acquisition of any property, the city may acquire such property by purchase, gift, eminent domain, or otherwise.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 97.)
-------------------------------------------

20824.

Instead of letting contracts for the improvement, the city may itself construct or complete the improvement, and buy the necessary materials, and employ the necessary labor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 97.)
-------------------------------------------

20826.

The city may contract with the federal government of the United States or any branch of it, or with any county, city and county, municipal corporation, district, or other public corporation, or with any person, firm, or corporation, for the joint acquisition or construction or use of any improvement to serve the district and such other area as may be designated in the contract, when, in the judgment of the governing body of the city, it is for the best interests of the district so to do. Any such contract may provide for the acquisition, construction, or maintenance of such improvement and for the payment by or for the parties to the contract of such proportionate part of the cost of such acquisition, construction, or maintenance as may be stated in the contract. The payments shall be made at such times and in such amounts as may be provided by said contract. Any such contract may provide for the joint use of any improvement upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the parties to the contract, and for the flowage, treatment, or disposal of sewage, industrial waste, surface water, or storm water from such area for each of the parties to the contract as may be described in the contract.

Any city which has acquired or constructed, or which proposes to acquire or construct, any improvement for the benefit of a district may contract with the federal government of the United States or any branch of it, or with any county, city and county, municipal corporation, district, or other public corporation, or with any person, firm, or corporation for the use of any such improvement by any such county, city and county, municipal corporation, district, or other public corporation, or for the flowage, treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial waste, surface water, or storm water from any area designated by such person, firm, or corporation so contracting, upon such terms and conditions as may be provided in the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 97.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 55. Highway Lighting Districts [20830. - 20832.5.]

20830.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by highway lighting districts as provided for in the Highway Lighting District Act pursuant to Part 4 (commencing with Section 19000) of Division 14 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 98.)
-------------------------------------------

20832.

Within 10 days after the establishment of the district, the governing body shall advertise for bids for installing and maintaining the system and for servicing the same. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. However, the rates to be paid shall not exceed the lawful rates applicable for the particular class of service and when necessary shall be those authorized by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. The contract for service shall be for a period not less than three years from and after the date electric energy and service is first delivered to the lighting district pursuant to such contract and shall be extended automatically thereafter for successive terms of one year each; provided, that the agreement may be terminated by either party upon not less than sixty (60) days’ written notice prior to the expiration date of the original term or any extended term. The governing body shall reserve the right to abrogate the contract whenever service is offered to be supplied at two-thirds of the fixed contract price.

No advertising for bids or awarding of the contract based thereon shall be required when the proposed contract includes the furnishing of electric energy, and the entire area of the district is served, or will be so served, by a single public utility whose rates are subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 98.)
-------------------------------------------

20832.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 53.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 56. Maintenance Districts—Improvement Act of 1911 [20840. - 20843.5.]

20840.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by maintenance districts as provided for in the Improvement Act of 1911 pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 5000) of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 99.)
-------------------------------------------

20842.

All contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder. The board shall advertise for two or more days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county, inviting bids for furnishing labor, material or supplies before any contract is made therefor. The board may require such bonds as it may deem adequate from the successful bidder to secure the faithful performance of the contract and the payment of all claims for labor and materials, and may reject any and all bids. In an emergency, work found by a four-fifths vote of the board to be necessary to protect life or property from impending flood damage may be done by negotiated contract without advertising for bids therefor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 99.)
-------------------------------------------

20843.

A contract for installing, maintaining and servicing a system of lights in any maintenance district shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. However, the rates to be paid shall not exceed the lawful rates applicable for the particular class of service and when necessary shall be those authorized by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. The contract for service shall be for a period not less than three years from and after the date electric energy and service is first delivered to the maintenance district pursuant to such contract and shall be extended automatically thereafter for successive terms of one year each; provided, that the agreement may be terminated by either party upon not less than 60 days’ written notice prior to the expiration date of the original term or any extended term. The board of supervisors shall reserve the right to abrogate the contract whenever service is offered to be supplied at two-thirds of the fixed contract price.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 99.)
-------------------------------------------

20843.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 54.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 57. Public Entities—Improvement Act of 1911 [20850. - 20874.]

20850.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by public entities as provided for in the Improvement Act of 1911 pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 5000) of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20852.

The superintendent of streets shall advertise for bids for the improvement of the roadbed pursuant to Section 6764 of the Streets and Highways Code. The legislative body shall award the contract for the making of the improvements to the lowest regular responsible bidder. The bidding and awarding of contracts shall be made in the manner provided in Part 3 (commencing with Section 5100) of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code for the awarding of contracts for improvements except that no notice of award shall be published.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1986, Ch. 195, Sec. 113.)
-------------------------------------------

20853.

Immediately upon the award of the contract, the superintendent of streets shall enter into a contract with the person to whom the contract was awarded for making the improvements upon the portions of the streets described in the notice inviting bids, and at the price stated in the bid. The contractor shall execute bonds in the manner required by Section 20426.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 553.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20854.

Upon the completion of the work and its acceptance, the street superintendent shall make a certificate of completion, together with a statement of the amount due under the terms of the contract for the performance of the work. The certificate shall be countersigned by the mayor and shall be recorded in the office of the superintendent of streets. The contractor thereupon shall be entitled to payment of the full amount of the contract price, and the recording of such certificate shall be sufficient notice to the owner of such track or tracks that the contract price is due and payable.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20855.

If the contract price is not paid within 30 days from the date of the recording of the certificate, the contractor may file a sworn statement to that effect with the superintendent of streets, who shall record the same in his or her office in the book in which the certificate of acceptance has been recorded. The contractor shall thereupon have a cause of action against the person owning the tracks for the amount of the contract, together with a reasonable attorney’s fee, and shall also have as security for the recovery of such amount, a first lien upon that portion of the track and franchises of the railroad, between whose rails or tracks the work has been performed, which is contained within the corporate limits of the city.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20856.

In the action, the certificate of completion shall be and constitute prima facie evidence of the regularity of all proceedings and of the right of the contractor to recover judgment against the person owning the tracks. Execution may be taken out upon the entry of judgment, and levied upon any property of that person which is subject to execution.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20857.

If the person files a written election to enter upon the direct performance of the work at its own cost and expense, no further proceedings shall be taken in the matter unless such person neglects or fails for 30 days, or for such further time as the legislative body may grant, to make the improvement. If the improvement of the portions of the street required to be improved by such person is not made with diligence or in all respects similar to the improvement of the rest of the street, or with the same materials or under the same specifications, and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets, the legislative body may, by resolution entered in its minutes, prescribe such terms and conditions as to it may seem fit and proper before permitting the said person to continue with the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20858.

If the person shall, after three days’ notice of the adoption of the resolution, fail to comply with the terms and conditions so prescribed, the legislative body may declare that person to have forfeited its privilege of performing such work under its own direction. Whereupon the street superintendent shall advertise for bids for the performance of the work, or such portion thereof as may remain uncompleted, and the contract therefor shall be awarded and entered into in the manner provided for in this article for the awarding and execution of contracts where the person owning the track has not elected to make the improvements under its own direction.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20859.

Upon the completion of the improvement, the contractor to whom the contract has been awarded, or his or her assigns, shall be entitled to a certificate of completion from the street superintendent, and shall have the right to collect from the person by suit, the amount specified in the certificate in all respects the same as provided in this article where the contract is let for such work in the first instance.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20867.

The legislative body shall award the contract for doing the work to the lowest responsible bidder. All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the public entity.

(c) A certified check made payable to the public entity.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the public entity.

The bids shall be delivered, opened, and award of contract made, all as provided by Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 5240) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code, except that no notice of award shall be published. Upon the award being made, the superintendent of streets shall enter into a contract with the person to whom the contract was awarded for doing the work described in the notice inviting bids, and at the price stated in the bid. The contractor shall execute a bond in the manner required by Section 5254 of the Streets and Highways Code.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the public entity beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 55.)
-------------------------------------------

20868.

Upon the completion of the work and its acceptance, the street superintendent shall make a certificate of completion, together with a statement of the amount due under the terms of the contract for the performance of the work. The certificate shall be countersigned by the mayor, and shall be recorded in the office of the superintendent of streets.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20869.

When the certificate of completion has been recorded the contractor shall be entitled to payment for the full amount of the contract price, and the recording of the certificate shall be sufficient notice to the owner of such track or tracks that such amount is due and payable.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20870.

If the contract price is not paid within 30 days from the date of the recording of the certificate of completion, the contractor may file a sworn statement to that effect with the superintendent of streets, who shall record the same in his or her office in the book in which the certificate of completion has been recorded. The contractor shall thereupon have a cause of action against the person owning the tracks for the amount of the contract, together with a reasonable attorney’s fee, to be fixed by the court, and shall also have as security for the recovery of such amount, a first lien upon that portion of the track and franchises of that railroad which is contained within the corporate limits of the city.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20871.

In the action, the certificate of completion shall be prima facie evidence of the regularity of all proceedings, and of the right of the contractor to recover judgment against the person. Execution may be taken out upon the entry of judgment, and levied upon any property of that person which is subject to execution.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20872.

If the person files a written election to enter upon the direct performance of such work at its own cost and expense, no further proceedings shall be taken in the matter unless such person neglects or fails for 30 days, or for such further time as the legislative body may, by resolution, grant, to make and complete the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20873.

If the work is not done with diligence as in this article provided, the legislative body may, by resolution entered upon its minutes, prescribe such terms and conditions as it may see fit and proper before permitting the person to continue with the work. If the person shall, after three days’ notice of the adoption of the resolution, fail to comply with the terms and conditions so prescribed, the legislative body may, at any time thereafter, declare the person to have forfeited its privilege of performing such work under its own direction. Whereupon the street superintendent shall advertise for bids for the performance of the work, or such portion thereof as may remain uncompleted, and the contract therefor shall be awarded and entered into in the manner provided for in this article for the awarding and execution of contracts where the person has not elected to make the improvements under its own direction.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------

20874.

Upon the completion of the improvement, the contractor to whom the contract has been awarded, or his or her assigns, shall be entitled to a certificate of completion from the street superintendent, and shall have the right to collect from the person by suit the amount specified in the certificate in all respects the same as provided in this chapter where the contract is let for such work in the first instance.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 100.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 58. Public Entities—Improvement Act of 1911 [20880. - 20886.]

20880.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by public entities as provided for in the Improvement Act of 1911 pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 5000) of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 101.)
-------------------------------------------

20886.

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve any city or public agency, if the work or improvement is to be performed by the city or public agency, from any competitive bidding requirements imposed, as to work performed by the city or public agency, by any charter or statutory provision applicable to it.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 101.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 59. Public Entities—Tree Planting Act of 1931 [20890. - 20898.]

20890.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by public entities as provided for in the Tree Planting Act of 1931 pursuant to Part 1 (commencing with Section 22000) of Division 15 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 102.)
-------------------------------------------

20893.

The board may direct the city forester to let contracts for all or any part of any improvement ordered by the city council. The city forester shall let the said contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, after notice by publication in two successive issues of any daily, or in one issue of any weekly, newspaper published and circulated in the city, or if there is no such newspaper, by posting for five days at three public places in the city. The work so contracted for shall be done under the supervision of the city forester.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 102.)
-------------------------------------------

20893.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the local agency.

(c) A certified check made payable to the local agency.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the local agency.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the local agency beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 56.)
-------------------------------------------

20894.

If the contractor abandons the work, or fails to proceed with it as rapidly as required by the contract, the city forester may relet the work in the same manner as in the first letting, or complete or cause it to be completed in any other manner he or she deems advisable. The city forester may retain the amount of any expense incidental to the reletting, out of any funds due or to become due to the contractor, and may also hold the contractor and the sureties upon the contractor’s bond responsible for any additional expenses and for any damages resulting from the abandonment or failure to complete the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 554.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

20895.

The legislative body, by contract or otherwise, shall provide for the performance of all work ordered by it pursuant to this article, including the construction and installation of any improvements and the furnishing of maintenance or service for any improvements.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 102.)
-------------------------------------------

20896.

All or any part of the improvements may be constructed, installed, or owned and all or any part of the maintenance and servicing of any of the improvements may be provided by one or any combination of any of the following:

(a) The local agency conducting proceedings.

(b) Any other public agency.

(c) Any public utility.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 102.)
-------------------------------------------

20897.

The local agency, by contract made with another public agency or with a public utility, may provide for the construction, installation, or ownership of any improvements or for the furnishing of maintenance or service for any improvements. Any contract with another public agency shall be made in compliance with all laws applicable to the other public agency and to the local agency. Any contract with a public utility shall be made in compliance with and subject to all tariffs, rules, and rate schedules of the public utility on file with and approved by the Public Utilities Commission. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a contract may contain such provisions as may be agreed upon by the local agency and the other public agency or the public utility, as the case may be.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 102.)
-------------------------------------------

20898.

Except for any work provided for by contract made pursuant to Section 20897, the legislative body shall provide for the construction or installation of all improvements and for the furnishing of maintenance and service for any improvements in accordance with and subject to all laws applicable to the local agency, including any laws requiring the letting of contracts after competitive bidding.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 102.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 60. Bridge and Highway Districts [20910. - 20919.]

20910.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by bridge and highway districts as provided for in the Bridge and Highway District Act pursuant to Part 3 (commencing with Section 27000) of Division 15 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 103.)
-------------------------------------------

20914.

(a) The district shall advertise, pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code, for contracts for all vessel repair, maintenance, and alteration work if the estimated expenditure exceeds one million dollars ($1,000,000), and for all other construction, repair, maintenance, and alteration work, and all similar work, if the estimated expenditure exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), in at least one newspaper and one trade paper of general circulation designated by the general manager, that are published in any one county or portion of a county within the district.

(b) The district shall publicly open the bids and award the contract to the lowest responsible
 bidder as follows:

 (1) For public works contracts that are subject to subdivision (a).

(2) For vessel repair, maintenance, and alteration work contracts.

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the district may, at its discretion,
 use informal bidding for contracts as follows:

 (1) For construction, repair, maintenance, and alteration work, and all similar work, with an estimated expenditure that does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).

(2) For vessel repair, maintenance, and alteration work that does not exceed one
 million dollars ($1,000,000).

(d) The district shall enact an ordinance if it elects to use informal bidding pursuant to subdivision (c) that governs the selection of contractors to perform construction, repair, maintenance, and alteration work, and all similar work, by informal bid. The ordinance shall include all of the following:

(1) Notice to contractors shall be provided in a manner determined by the district.

(2) The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

(e) Any contracts for vessel repair, maintenance, and alteration work that does not exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000) for which the informal bidding procedure adopted pursuant to subdivision (d) is not used shall be advertised pursuant to subdivision (a) and awarded pursuant to subdivision (b).

(f) In case of emergency, work may be contracted without advertising or competitive bidding, provided that the district complies with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 396, Sec. 2.   (SB 622)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

20915.

It shall be unlawful to employ any means to evade the provisions of this article requiring contracts to be awarded after advertising and competitive bidding, including the splitting of projects into smaller work orders, the amendment of existing contracts, or the approval of a subcontract or subcontracts let under existing contracts. Every person who willfully violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 103.)
-------------------------------------------

20916.

All contracts in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) entered into by the district for the hiring or purchase of equipment, supplies, or materials, are of no effect unless the district shall advertise pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code for bids for such contracts in at least one newspaper and not more than three newspapers designated by the general manager, which are published in any one county or portion of a county within the district, and unless the district shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 103.)
-------------------------------------------

20916.1.

Notwithstanding Section 20916, the purchase of all supplies, equipment, and materials by the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District shall be subject to the following:

(a) When the expenditure required exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), the purchase shall be by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder, or, in the district’s discretion, to the responsible bidder who submitted a proposal that provides the best value to the district on the basis of the factors identified in the solicitation. “Best value” means the overall combination of quality, price, and other elements of a proposal that, when considered together, provide the greatest overall benefit in response to the requirements described in the solicitation documents.

(b) To the extent practicable, the district shall obtain a minimum of three quotations, either written or oral, that permit prices and terms to be compared whenever the expected expenditure required for the purchase of supplies, equipment, or materials exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). 

(c) Notice requesting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and on the district’s procurement Internet Web site, which publication shall be made at least 10 days before the bids are received. The board may reject any and all bids and
 readvertise at its discretion. 

(d) This section applies solely to the procurement of supplies, equipment, and materials, and shall not apply to construction contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 2009, Ch. 408, Sec. 3.   (AB 116)   Effective January 1, 2010.)
-------------------------------------------

20916.3.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the award of purchase contracts by the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District under competitive bid procedures may not be feasible for products and materials which are undergoing rapid technological changes or for the introduction of new technologies into district operations. Under these circumstances, it is in the public interest to consider the broadest possible range of competing products and materials available, fitness of purpose, manufacturer’s warranty, performance reliability, delivery timetables, vendor financing, support logistics, and other similar factors in addition to price in the award of these contracts.

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the board may direct the purchase of the specialized equipment specified in subdivision (g) by competitive negotiation upon a finding, by a two-thirds vote of the membership of the board, that the purchase of that equipment pursuant to laws otherwise applicable to the purchase is not feasible or in the public interest.

(c) Competitive negotiation, for the purposes of this section, includes, but is not limited to, all of the following requirements:

(1) A request for proposals shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined by the board, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. In addition, notice of the request for proposals shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation, at least 10 days before the date for receipt of the proposals. The board shall make every effort to generate the maximum feasible number of proposals from qualified sources and shall make a finding to that effect before proceeding to negotiate if only a single response to the request for proposals is received.

(2) A request for proposals shall identify all significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance.

(3) The board shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for contract award.

(4) Award shall be made to the qualified proposer whose proposal will be most advantageous to the district, with price and all other factors considered. If award is not made to the bidder whose proposal contains the lowest price, the board shall make a finding setting forth the basis for the award.

(d) The board may reject any and all proposals and request new proposals, at its discretion.

(e) Upon making an award to a qualified proposer, the board, upon request, shall make available to all other proposers and to the public, an analysis of the award which provides the basis for the selection of that particular qualified proposal.

(f) A person who submits, or who plans to submit, a proposal may protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this section as follows:

(1) Protests based on the content of the request for proposals shall be filed with the board within 10 calendar days after the request for proposals is first advertised in accordance with subdivision (b). The board shall issue a written decision on the protest prior to the opening of proposals. A protest may be renewed by refiling the protest with the board within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(2) Any bidder may protest the recommended award on any ground not based upon the content of the request for proposals by filing a protest with the board within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the notice of the recommended award.

(3) Any protest shall contain a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts supporting the protest. Protestors shall have an opportunity to appear and be heard before the board prior to the opening of proposals in the case of protests based on the content of the request for proposals, or prior to final award in the case of protests based on other grounds or the renewal of protests based on the content of the request for proposals.

(g) This section applies only to the purchase by the district of computers, telecommunications equipment, automated toll and fare collection equipment, microwave equipment, and other related electronic equipment and apparatus. This section does not apply to contracts for construction or for the procurement of any product available in substantial quantities to the general public.

(h) Provisions in any contract concerning women and minority business enterprises, which provisions are in accordance with the request for proposals, shall not be subject to negotiation with the successful bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1990, Ch. 591, Sec. 2.)
-------------------------------------------

20916.5.

All bids for construction work shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash.

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the district.

(c) A certified check made payable to the district.

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the district.

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808, Sec. 57.)
-------------------------------------------

20917.

If, after rejecting bids received under Section 20916, the board determines and declares by a two-thirds vote of all of its members that, in its opinion, the equipment, supplies, or materials may be purchased at a lower price in the open market, the board may proceed to purchase the equipment, supplies, or materials in the open market without further observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or advertisement.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 256, Sec. 103.)
-------------------------------------------

20918.

In case of an emergency, the board may, by resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of all of its members, declare and determine that public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon proceed to expend or enter into a contract involving the expenditure of any sum needed in such emergency without observance of the provisions requiring contracts, bids, or advertisement. If notice for bid to let contracts will not be given, the board shall also comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 15.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.

Notwithstanding Sections 20916 and 20916.1, the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District may, without further competitive bidding, contract with suppliers of goods and services by participating in contracts let by one or more city, county, city and county, district, school district, public authority, public agency, municipal corporation, or other political subdivision in the state, and to the extent provided by law, any other entity that expends public funds for the procurement of goods and services. This section is in addition to the authority granted in Sections 10298 and 10299. This section does not apply to construction contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 396, Sec. 3.   (SB 622)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 60.4. Job Order Contracting for School Districts [20919.20. - 20919.33.]

20919.20.

The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:

(a) It is the intent of the Legislature, in enacting this article, to demonstrate an alternative and optional procedure for bidding of public works projects that is applicable only to school districts. The Legislature has previously authorized the use of this alternative and optional procedure
 only for the Los Angeles Unified School District, which is using the procedure in conjunction with its project stabilization agreement.

(b) Districts should be able to utilize cost-effective options for the delivery of public works projects, in accordance with the national trend, which include authorizations in California, to allow public entities to utilize job order contracts as a project delivery method.

(c) The benefits of a job order contract project delivery system include accelerated completion of the projects, cost savings, and reduction of construction contracting complexity for the unified school district.

(d) The job order contracting approach should be used for the purposes of
 reducing project cost and expediting project completion.

(e) The availability of job order contracting as a project delivery method will not preclude the use of traditional methods of project delivery if a traditional method results in higher cost savings.

(f) It is the intent of the Legislature that job order contracts be competitively bid and awarded to the bidders providing the most qualified responsive bids. It is further the intent of the Legislature that school districts use the job order contract process pursuant to this article only if the school district has entered into a project labor agreement that meets the requirements of Section 2500 for all its public works projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.21.

As used in this chapter:

(a) “Adjustment factor” means the job order contractor’s competitively bid adjustment to the school district’s prices as published in the unit price catalog.

(b) “Indefinite quantity” means one or more of the construction tasks listed in the unit price catalog.

(c) “Job order” means a firm, fixed priced, lump-sum order issued by the school district to a job order contractor for a definite project scope of work as compiled from the unit price catalog to be performed pursuant to a job order contract.

(d) “Job order contract” means a contract, awarded to a most qualified
 bidder as described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 20919.24, between the school district and a licensed, bonded, and general liability insured contractor in which the contractor agrees to a fixed period, fixed-unit price, and indefinite quantity contract that provides for the use of job orders for public works or maintenance projects.

(e) “Job order contract technical specifications” means a book, published by the school district, detailing the technical specifications with regard to quality of materials and workmanship to be used by the job order contractor in accomplishing the tasks listed in the unit price catalog.

(f) “Job order contractor” means a licensed, bonded, and general liability insured contractor awarded a job order contract.

(g) “Offer to perform work” means the job order contractor’s
 proposal for a specific job order.

(h) “Plans and specifications” means the unit price catalog and the job order contract technical specifications. The scope of work to be performed with a job order contract is potentially, but not necessarily, all the tasks published in the unit price catalog.

(i) “Project” means the specific requirements and work to be accomplished by the job order contractor in connection with an individual job order.

(j) “Project labor agreement” means an agreement that meets the requirements of Section 2500.

(k) “Project scope of work” means the document and related drawings, specifications, and writings referenced therein which together set forth the specific requirements and work to be accomplished by the job order contractor in
 connection with an individual job order.

(l) “Proposal” means the job order contractor prepared document quoting those construction tasks listed in the unit price catalog that the job order contractor requires to complete the project scope of work, together with the appropriate quantities of each task. The pricing of each task shall be accomplished by multiplying the construction task unit price by the proposed quantity and the contractor’s competitively bid adjustment factor. The proposal shall also contain a schedule for the completion of a specific project scope of work as requested by the school district. The proposal may also contain approved drawings, work schedule, permits, or other documentation as the school district may require for a specific job order. The proposal shall be certified as contract compliant by a reviewer independent of the contractor.

(m) “Public works”
 has the same meaning as in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(n) “Public works project” has the same meaning as “public project,” as defined in Section 22002.

(o) “Subcontractor” means any person, firm, or corporation, other than the employees of the job order contractor, who is bonded and general liability insured and who contracts to furnish labor, or labor and materials, at the worksite or in connection with a job order, whether directly or indirectly on behalf of the job order contractor.

(p) “School district” means any school district.

(q) “Unit price catalog” means a book containing specific construction tasks and the unit prices to install or demolish that construction. The listed tasks shall be
 based on generally accepted industry standards and information, where available, for various items of work to be performed by the job order contractor. The prices shall include the cost of materials, labor, and equipment for performing the items of work. The prices shall not include overhead and profit. All unit prices shall be developed using local prevailing wages.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 296, Sec. 2.   (AB 618)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.22.

Provisions in this article only apply to school districts that choose to utilize job order contracting. A school district may utilize job order contracting, when permitted by this article, as an alternative to any contracting procedures that the school district is otherwise authorized or required by law to use.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.23.

(a) The school district may utilize job order contracting pursuant to this article only if the school district has entered into a project labor agreement or agreements that will apply to all public works awarded through job order contracting and to all other public works of the school district that exceed a monetary threshold set by the school district until January 1, 2027, regardless of what contracting procedure is used to award that work.

(b) The school district shall prepare an execution plan for all modernization projects that may be eligible for job order contracting pursuant to this article. The school district shall select from that plan a sufficient number of projects to be initiated as job order contracts during each calendar year and shall determine
 for each selected project that job order contracting will reduce the total cost of that project. Job order contracting shall not be used if the school district finds that it will increase the total cost of the project.

(c) (1) An entity awarded a job order contract in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall provide an enforceable commitment to the school district that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the job order contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the job order contract is subject to a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the job order
 contract to use a skilled and trained workforce to perform the job order contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 303, Sec. 3.   (AB 846)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.24.

Bidding for job order contracts shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) The school district shall prepare a set of documents for job order contracts. The documents shall include a unit price catalog and preestablished unit prices, job order contract technical specifications, and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the school district’s needs.

(2) Any architect, engineer, consultant, or contractor retained by the school district to assist in the development of the job order contract documents shall not be eligible to bid or to participate in the preparation of a bid with any job order contractor.

(b) Based on the documents prepared under subdivision (a), the school district shall prepare a request for bid that invites prequalified job order contractors to submit competitive sealed bids in the manner prescribed by the school district.

(1) (A) The prequalified job order contractors, as determined by the school district, shall bid one or more adjustment factors to the unit prices listed in the unit price catalog based on the job order contract technical specifications. Awards shall be made to the prequalified bidders that the school district determines to be the most qualified based upon preestablished criteria made by the school district. The prequalified bidders shall be in compliance with the school district’s project labor agreement.

(B) Compliance shall constitute no more than three major violations on any school district projects within the last three years. If a contractor has more than three violations within a three-year period of time, the school district shall seek administrative review of the violations. Violations will include, but are not limited to, the following:

(i) Failure to register core workers with the appropriate building trade union.

(ii) Failure to assign apprentices in accordance with Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code.

(iii) Failure to comply with subdivision (c) of Section 20919.25.

(iv) Incorrect
 assignment of work in accordance with the school district’s project labor agreement.

(2) The school district may award multiple job order contracts through a request for bid. Job order contracts shall be awarded to the most qualified prequalified bidders described in this subdivision.

(3) The request for bids may encourage the participation of local construction firms and the use of local subcontractors.

(c) (1) The school district shall establish a procedure to prequalify job order contractors using a standard questionnaire that includes, at a minimum, the issues covered by the standardized questionnaire and model guidelines for rating bidders developed by the Department of Industrial Relations
 pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 20101. This questionnaire shall require information including, but not limited to, all of the following:

(A) If the job order contractor is a partnership, limited partnership, or other association, a listing of all of the partners or association members known at the time of bid submission who
 will participate in the job order contract.

(B) Evidence that the members of the job order contractor have the capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage the construction of the project, as well as a financial statement that assures the school district that the job order contractor has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to perform construction, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the job order contractor has the
 capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding and liability insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history, worker safety programs, and apprenticeship programs.

(F) A full disclosure regarding all of the following that are applicable:

(i) Any serious or willful violation of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Division 5 of the Labor Code or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the job order contractor.

(ii) Any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project.

(iii) Any instance where the job order contractor, or its owners, officers, or managing employees submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive, or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(iv) Any instance where the job order contractor, or its owners, officers, or managing employees defaulted on a construction contract.

(v) Any violations of the Contractors’ State License Law (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), excluding alleged violations of federal or state law regarding the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or of Federal Insurance Contribution
 Act (FICA) withholding requirements settled against any member of the job order contractor.

(vi) Any bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the job order contractor, including, but not limited to, information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(vii) Any settled adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the job order contractor during the five years preceding submission of a bid under this article, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this period.

(G) In the case of a partnership or any association that is not a legal
 entity, a copy of the agreement creating the partnership or association and specifying that all partners or association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the job order contract.

(2) The information required under this subdivision shall be verified under oath by the entity and its members in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information that is not a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 28, Sec. 132.   (SB 1380)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.25.

(a) The maximum total dollar amount that may be awarded under a single job order contract shall not exceed five million dollars ($5,000,000) in the first term of the job order contract and, if extended or renewed pursuant to subdivision (b), a maximum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) over the subsequent two terms of the job order contract.

(b) Job order contracts may be executed for an initial contract term of no more than 12 months, with the option of extending or renewing the job order contract for two 12-month periods. The term of the job order contract shall be for the contract term or whenever the maximum value of the contract is achieved, whichever
 is less. All extensions or renewals shall be priced as provided in the request for bids. The extension or renewal shall be mutually agreed to by the school district and the job order contractor.

(c) The school district may issue job orders to the job order contractor that has been awarded the job order contract. The job order issued to the job order contractor shall not commence for seven days from the time the job order was issued and the job order contractor shall provide a minimum of seven days’ notice for the addition of any subcontractor or substitution of any subcontractor as described in subdivision (e) of Section 20919.26. The job order shall be based on a project scope of work prepared by the school district as well as a proposal from the job order contractor who is awarded the job order contract. No single job order may exceed one
 million dollars ($1,000,000).

(d) The amounts specified in subdivisions (a) and (c) shall be adjusted on January 1, 2016, as if this section was operative beginning January 1, 2004, to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index, and shall be adjusted each January 1 thereafter to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index. 

(e) It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller job orders any project for the purpose of evading the cost limitation provisions of this chapter.

(f) All work performed under the job order contract shall be covered by a project labor agreement.

(g) Any change or alteration to a job
 order shall be in compliance with Section 20118.4.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.26.

(a) All work bid under the job order contract shall comply with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1 and is subject to all of the penalties and provisions set forth in that chapter.

(b) For purposes of this article, if the primary job order contractor chooses to use subcontractors, the primary job order contractor is required to verify that the subcontractors possess the appropriate licenses and credentials required to perform construction.

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the primary job order contractor may use subcontractors that are not listed at the time the job order is
 issued if the work to be performed under that job order is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(d) If the primary job order contractor chooses to use a subcontractor that is not listed at the time of bid to perform work on a job order, all of the following apply:

(1) The primary job order contractor shall provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted by trade. The public notice shall include the scope of work; the project location; the name, address, and the telephone number of the primary job order contractor; and the closing date, time, and location for sealed bids to be submitted.

(2) The primary job order contractor shall take sealed bids from the subcontractors solicited for the proposal.
 These bids shall be publicly opened at a prescribed time and place by the primary job order contractor. After the bids are opened, the job order contractor shall notify the school district which subcontractor was selected.

(3) The notification shall include every subcontractor for all tiers and must establish the authorized subcontractor list for the job order. Work shall not commence prior to seven days’ notice of the established subcontractor list and the subsequent addition of any subcontractor to the job order.

(4) The notification shall identify the scope of the work to be performed by each subcontractor to the job order, broken down by craft. If a subcontractor performs multiple crafts, the job order contractor shall identify the work of each craft to be performed.

(e) If the primary job order contractor chooses to make a substitution to the subcontractor list, the primary job order contractor shall provide a minimum of seven days’ notice to the school district along with justification as to the need for the substitution. The school district may request a hearing to evaluate the substitution request, which shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(f) If the school district determines that there has been a violation of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1, including bid shopping by the primary job order contractor, the school district may terminate the job order or the contractor may lose authorization to proceed with awarded work subject to the school district’s administrative due process
 review, if such review is established pursuant to the school district’s project labor agreement. If the school district determines that a job order contractor has violated any provision set forth in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1, the school district may declare the contractor ineligible for future job orders and may result in a loss of prequalification status for a period of time to be determined by the school district.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.27.

(a) A job order contract shall set forth in the general conditions of the job order contract the party or parties responsible for seeing that the provisions of Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code are complied with.

(b) For purposes of job order contracting, prevailing wages when required to be paid shall apply to all work ordered under the job order contract regardless of thresholds set forth in Section 1771.5 of the Labor Code.

(c) The job order contractor shall pay the prevailing wage in effect at the time the job order is issued by the
 school district and all increases as published by the Department of Industrial Relations for the term of the job order contract, including all overtime, holiday, and shift provisions published by the Department of Industrial Relations.

(d) The school district shall designate one individual to act as a monitor to inspect job sites for labor compliance violations at the request of the designated labor representative in its project labor agreement.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.28.

A willful violation of Section 20919.26 occurs when the job order contractor or subcontractor knew or reasonably should have known of his or her obligations under the public works law and deliberately fails or refuses to comply with its provisions. The school district using job order contracting shall publish and distribute to the Labor Commissioner a list of all job order contractors or subcontractors who violate this provision and the school district shall not award a job order contract or any future job orders under an existing job order contract to any contractor or subcontractor who violates this provision during the effective period of debarment of the contractor or subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.29.

For purposes of employment of apprentices on job order contracts, when the individual job order involves more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) or 20 working days, all general contractors or subcontractors shall at all times be in compliance with Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code and shall comply with the following:

(a) Prior to commencing work on an individual job order, every contractor shall submit job order award information to an applicable apprenticeship program that can supply apprentices to the site of the job order. The information submitted shall include an estimate of the journeyman hours to be performed under the contract, the number of apprenticeships proposed to
 be employed, and the approximate dates the apprentices would be employed. A copy of this information shall also be submitted to the awarding agency if requested by the awarding agency.

(b) The ratio of work performed by apprentices to journeymen employed in a particular craft or trade on the job order may be no higher than the ratio stipulated in the apprenticeship standard under which the apprenticeship program operates where the job order contractor agrees to be bound by those standards but, except as otherwise provided in Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code, in no case shall the ratio be less than one hour of apprenticeship work for every five hours of journeyman work.

(c) Every apprentice employed under the job order contract shall be paid the prevailing rate of per diem
 wages for apprentices in the trade to which he or she is registered and shall be employed only at the work of the craft or trade to which he or she is registered.

(d) Every apprentice employed under the job order contract shall be hired from the local joint labor management apprenticeship committee that has jurisdiction in the geographic area of the project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.30.

A job order contractor or subcontractor that knowingly violates the provisions involving employment of apprentices shall forfeit as a civil penalty an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) for each full calendar day of noncompliance. The amount of this penalty shall be based on consideration of whether the violation was a good faith mistake due to inadvertence. A contractor or subcontractor that knowingly commits a second or subsequent violation of the provisions involving employment of apprentices within a three-year period where the noncompliance results in apprenticeship training not being provided as required, shall forfeit as a civil penalty a sum of not more than three hundred dollars ($300) for each full calendar day of
 noncompliance and shall not be awarded any further job orders under the job order contract and shall be precluded for a period of one year from bidding on any future job order contracts.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.31.

In order to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse, the school district adopting job order contracting shall do all of the following:

(a) Prepare for each individual job order developed under a job order contract an independent school district estimate. The estimate will be prepared prior to the receipt of the contractor’s offer to perform work and will be compared to the contractor’s proposed price to determine the reasonableness of that price before issuance of any job order. The basis for any adjustments to the school district estimate is to be documented. In the event that the contractor’s proposal for a given job order is found to be unreasonable, not cost effective, or undesirable,
 the school district is under no obligation to issue the job order to the job order contractor, and may instead utilize any other available procurement procedures.

(b) The school district shall not issue a job order until the job order has been reviewed and approved by the appropriate level of management.

(c) Once a job order has been issued, all documents pertaining to preparation and approval of the job order, including the independent school district estimate, shall be available for public review.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.32.

A school district that adopts the job order contracting process shall also adopt a payment resolution process which may include, but not be limited to, the convening of a payment resolution committee.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 753, Sec. 2.   (AB 1431)   Effective January 1, 2016.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, pursuant to Section 20919.33.)
-------------------------------------------

20919.33.

This article shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2027, deletes or extends that date.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 303, Sec. 4.   (AB 846)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Article 60.4, commencing with Section 20919.20.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 60.5. Reclamation Districts [20920. - 20927.]

20920.

This article applies to contracts by reclamation districts formed under special acts of the Legislature or under Division 15 (commencing with Section 50000) of the Water Code or any district which is otherwise authorized to act under that division.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20921.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, or for materials or supplies, in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall be let to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided in this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20922.

It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring work to be done by contract after competitive bidding.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20923.

The board shall advertise for bids by at least two insertions, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation circulated within the district, or if there is none, shall post notice at least 10 days before the date of opening of bids in at least three public places in the district that have been designated by resolution of the district as the places for posting public notices. The notice inviting sealed bids shall state the proposed improvement or work and shall set a date for opening of bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20924.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, whenever a district participates in any federal or state assistance program, the district shall comply with the procurement requirements of that program to the extent that the requirements are more restrictive than those set forth in this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20925.

The board shall have the right to reject any and all bids not suitable to the best interests of the district. In its discretion, the board may readvertise for new bids or negotiate an offered bid, if it is the sole bid received and the negotiated price does not exceed the offered bid for the work as advertised. If two or more bids are the same and are the lowest, the district board may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the district board may proceed to complete the project by force account or contract without further compliance with this article.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

20926.

(a) In the event of any emergency, the board may negotiate and award a contract for construction of work to prevent damage or repair damaged works without advertising for bids and expend any sum reasonably required in the emergency. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the board or any trustee authorizing or contracting for work in an emergency shall, if practicable, informally solicit bids or requests for proposals to seek to obtain the best terms possible, including the lowest price term, given the urgent circumstances of the emergency, and, promptly after the emergency ends, shall document the circumstances of the emergency and the bid or proposal accepted.

(c) Work to further reconstruct or rehabilitate damaged works after the emergency ends shall be subject to the requirements of this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 16.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20927.

The limitations set forth in Section 20921 may be exceeded to a maximum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for projects and purchases of materials for projects for which no assistance from federal, state, or other local governmental agencies is requested, if that approval is secured from the landowners of the district representing at least two-thirds of the assessment valuation of the district, or if no assessment has been collected within the prior year, by the landowners representing at least two-thirds of the acreage within the district. The approval may be obtained either through a special election held for that purpose or by written consent of the approving landowners. The special election may be conducted by mail ballot.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1042, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 60.6. Surface Storage Projects [20928. - 20928.4.]

20928.

The Legislature finds and declares that alternative project delivery, using the best value procurement methodology, has been authorized for various agencies that have reported benefits from those projects, including reduced project costs, expedited project start and completion, simplified project controls and accountability, and design features that are not achievable through the traditional design-bid-build method.

(History: Added by Stats. 2016, Ch. 760, Sec. 1.   (AB 2551)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

20928.1.

(a) A surface storage project identified in the CALFED Bay-Delta Program Record of Decision, dated August 28, 2000, that receives funding pursuant to Division 26.7 (commencing with Section 79700) of the Water Code may use, in addition to any other methods of project delivery otherwise allowable by irrigation districts, county water districts, or other similar water districts by law, the following methods of project delivery:

(1) Construction manager at-risk.

(2) Design-Build, including conventional, progressive, and target price.

(3) Design-build-operate.

(b) The contract shall be awarded on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 2016, Ch. 760, Sec. 1.   (AB 2551)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

20928.2.

The procurement process for the project shall progress as follows:

(a) The local agency shall prepare a set of documents setting forth the scope and estimated price of the project. The documents may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or building layouts, or any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the local agency’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in California.

(b) The local agency shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to prequalify or short-list the entities, including subcontractors and suppliers, whose bids shall be evaluated for final selection. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate bids, the procedure for final selection of the bidder, and any other information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design-related
 expertise, construction expertise, acceptable safety records, and all other nonprice-related factors.

(3) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the local agency. In preparing the standard template, the local agency may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other local agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this article. The template shall require all of the following information:

(A) If the bidder is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, comprised of privately held entities, a listing of all of the shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the contracting team have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the bidder has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required for the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the bidder has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding,
 liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) An acceptable safety record. “Safety record” means the prior history concerning the safe performance of construction contracts. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s safety record shall include, at a minimum, its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period.

(4) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the bidder and its general partners or joint venture members.

(c) A contracting entity shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the local agency that the entity and its subcontractors will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades.

(1) For purposes of this subdivision:

(A) “Apprenticeable occupation” means an occupation for which the chief had approved an apprenticeship program pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code prior to January 1, 2014.

(B) “Skilled and trained workforce” means a workforce that meets all of the following
 conditions:

(i) All the workers are either skilled journeypersons or apprentices registered in an apprenticeship program approved by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards.

(ii) (I) For work performed on or after January 1, 2017, at least 30 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by the bidder and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was either approved by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code or located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(II) For work performed on or after January 1, 2018, at least 40 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by the bidder and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was either approved by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code or located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(III) For work performed on or after January 1, 2019, at least 50 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by the bidder and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates
 of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was either approved by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code or located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(IV) For work performed on or after January 1, 2020, at least 60 percent of the skilled journeypersons employed to perform work on the contract or project by the bidder and each of its subcontractors at every tier are graduates of an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was either approved by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards pursuant to Section 3075 of the Labor Code or located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship regulations
 adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(iii) For an apprenticeable occupation in which no apprenticeship program had been approved by the chief prior to January 1, 1995, up to one-half of the graduation percentage requirements of clause (ii) may be satisfied by skilled journeypersons who commenced working in the apprenticeable occupation prior to the chief’s approval of an apprenticeship program for that occupation in the county in which the project is located.

(C) “Skilled journeyperson” means a worker who either:

(i) Graduated from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that was approved by the chief or located outside California and approved for federal purposes pursuant to the apprenticeship
 regulations adopted by the federal Secretary of Labor.

(ii) Has at least as many hours of on-the-job experience in the applicable occupation as would be required to graduate from an apprenticeship program for the applicable occupation that is approved by the chief.

(2) The apprenticeship graduation percentage requirements of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) are satisfied if, in a particular calendar month, either of the following is true:

(A) The required percentage of the skilled journeypersons employed by the contractor or subcontractor to perform work on the contract or project meet the graduation percentage requirement.

(B) For the hours of work
 performed by skilled journeypersons employed by the contractor or subcontractor on the contract or project, the percentage of hours performed by skilled journeypersons who met the graduation requirement meets or exceeds the required graduation percentage.

(3) A contractor or subcontractor need not meet the apprenticeship graduation requirements of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) if, during the calendar month, the contractor or subcontractor employs skilled journeypersons to perform fewer than 10 hours of work on the contract or project.

(4) A subcontractor need not meet the apprenticeship graduation requirements of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) if both of the following requirements are met:

(A) The
 subcontractor was not a listed subcontractor under Section 4104 or a substitute for a listed subcontractor.

(B) The subcontract does not exceed one-half of 1 percent of the price of the prime contract.

(5) (A) A contractor, bidder, or other entity’s commitment that a skilled and trained workforce will be used to perform the project or contract shall be established by the contractor, bidder, or other entity’s agreement with the local agency that the contractor, bidder, or other entity and its subcontractors at every tier will comply with this subdivision and that the contractor, bidder, or other entity will provide the local agency with a report on a monthly basis while the project or contract is being performed, as to whether the contractor, bidder, or other entity
 and its subcontractors are complying with the requirements of this subdivision.

(B) If the contractor, bidder, or other entity fails to provide the monthly report required by this section, or provides a report that is incomplete, the local agency shall withhold further payments until a complete report is provided.

(C) If a monthly report does not demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the local agency shall withhold further payments until the contractor, bidder, or other entity provides a plan to achieve substantial compliance with this article, with respect to the relevant apprenticeable occupation, prior to completion of the contract or project.

(D) A monthly report provided to the public agency or other awarding
 body shall be a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) and shall be open to public
 inspection.

(6) This subdivision shall not apply if the contractor, bidder, or other entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind itself and all its subcontractors who perform construction work on the project, and the contractor, bidder, or other entity agrees to be bound by the project agreement.

(d) The local agency shall make the list of prequalified entities available to the public.

(e) Based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), the local agency shall prepare a request for bids that invites prequalified or short-listed entities to submit competitive sealed bids in the manner prescribed by the local agency. The request for bids shall include, but need not be
 limited to, all of the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the estimated cost to perform the work being requested, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate bids, whether the contract will be awarded on the basis of best value or to the lowest responsible bidder, and any other information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating bids, including, but not limited to, cost or price and all nonprice-related factors.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors
 identified in the request for bids.

(4) If a best value selection method is used, the local agency may reserve the right to request bid revisions and hold discussions and negotiations with responsive bidders, in which case the local agency shall so specify in the request for bids and shall publish separately or incorporate into the request for bids applicable procedures to be observed by the local agency to ensure that any discussions or negotiations are conducted in good faith.

(f) For those projects utilizing low bid as the final selection method, the competitive bidding process shall, if appropriate for the delivery method, result in lump-sum bids by the prequalified or short-listed entities, and awards shall be made to the bidder that is the lowest responsible bidder.

(g) For those projects utilizing best value as a selection method, the competition shall progress as follows:

(1) Competitive bids shall be evaluated by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for bids. The following minimum factors, however, shall be included, if applicable to the delivery method and weighted as deemed appropriate by the local agency:

(A) Price, unless a stipulated sum is specified and including financial and bonding capacity requirements.

(B) Technical design, procurement, and construction expertise.

(C) Proposed construction approach,
 sequencing, and methods.

(D) Compliance with the requirements of the owner-provided performance specification.

(E) Ability to meet the milestone schedule dates and, if applicable, any liquidated damages.

(F) Ability to meet the quality requirements.

(G) Proposed risk allocation and sharing.

(H) Safety record.

(I) Warranty.

(J) Life-cycle costs over 15 or more years as specified by the local agency.

(2) Pursuant
 to subdivision (e), the local agency may hold discussions or negotiations with responsive bidders using the process articulated in the local agency’s request for bids.

(3) When the evaluation is complete, the responsive bidders shall be ranked based on a determination of value provided by the local agency if no more than three bidders are required to be ranked.

(4) The award of the contract shall be made to the responsible bidder whose bid is determined by the local agency to have offered the best value to the public.

(5) Notwithstanding any provision of the Water Code, upon issuance of a contract award the local agency shall publicly announce its award, identifying the bidder to which the award is made, along
 with a statement regarding the basis of the award.

(6) The statement regarding the local agency’s contract award, described in paragraph (5), and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 364.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.)
-------------------------------------------

20928.3.

(a) The local agency, in each request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that must be included in the entity statement of qualifications and proposal.

(b) Following award of the contract, the entity shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work:

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the local agency, including a fixed date and time on
 which qualification statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing. The foregoing process does not apply to construction subcontractors listed in the original proposal.

(History: Added by Stats. 2016, Ch. 760, Sec. 1.   (AB 2551)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------

20928.4.

Any project constructed pursuant to this article shall be subject to Part 1 (commencing with Section 6000) of Division 3 of the Water Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2016, Ch. 760, Sec. 1.   (AB 2551)   Effective January 1, 2017.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 60.7. Water District Contract Bids [20929. - 20929.]

20929.

All bids for construction work requested by an agency or district covered by this chapter shall be presented under sealed cover and shall be accompanied by one of the following forms of bidder’s security:

(a) Cash. 

(b) A cashier’s check made payable to the agency or district. 

(c) A certified check made payable to the agency or district. 

(d) A bidder’s bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the agency or district. 

Upon an award to the lowest bidder, the security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned in a reasonable period of time, but in no event shall that security be held by the agency or district beyond 60 days from the time the award is made.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 20920 (as amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 808) by Stats. 1991, Ch. 1091, Sec. 125.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 1.5. Water District Acts [20930. - 21641.]



  ARTICLE 61. Levee District No. 1 of Sutter County [20930. - 20931.]

20930.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by Levee District No. 1 of Sutter County, as provided for in Chapter 349 of the Statutes of 1873–74.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20931.

(a) The board shall annually have prepared, and shall adopt, plans and specifications of all necessary repairs to the levees of the district and of any new levees to be constructed and all other works of improvement for the benefit of the district, and shall divide the work into convenient sections. The plans and specifications shall be filed in the office of the board not later than the first day of July of each year and shall be subject to inspection by any interested person for at least two weeks prior to the letting of any contract for work in accordance with those plans and specifications. If the cost of repair or construction in any one of the sections will exceed five hundred dollars ($500) the board must, not later than the first day of July in each year, give notice by publication at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in one or more newspapers printed and published in Sutter County, that sealed proposals will be received and opened at the office of the board, at a time specified in the notice, for the construction of repairs, new levees, and other works of improvement in each separate section of work, and for the whole work, in accordance with the plans and specifications. At the time and place specified in the notice the board shall publicly open the bids and let the contract or contracts to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders; provided, however, that the board may reject any bid. If any or all bids are rejected the board shall immediately readvertise for bids, as in the first instance, for work that has not been let and upon the opening and consideration of those new bids the board shall have the right to reject any of them and have the work done by day labor. Every person, firm or corporation to whom a contract is awarded shall enter into a bond with sufficient sureties, to be approved by the board, equal to one-half of the contract price, conditioned for the faithful performance of the contract in accordance with the plans and specifications.

(b) In cases of emergency, the board may, by unanimous consent of all the members, proceed at once to replace or repair any and all levees in the district without notice. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) In case of vacancy in the office of any director or directors of the district by reason of death, resignation, or other cause (whether the same shall occur before or after the effective date of this act), the board of supervisors of Sutter County shall have power to fill the same by appointment. A person so appointed to fill such a vacancy shall hold office until the first Monday in March following the next election in the district at which directors are to be elected and until his or her successor has been elected.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 17.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 62. Protection Districts [20940. - 20942.]

20940.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by protection districts as provided for in Chapter 201 of the Statutes of 1895.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20941.

(a) All work done in any district shall be ordered by the board of supervisors of the county in which the district is located and shall be under the direction of the county surveyor or county engineer. All work which exceeds an estimated cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000) shall be advertised and let to the lowest bidder; provided, however, that at the time of an emergency the board of supervisors may order emergency work done without advertising for bids. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board of supervisors shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(b) As soon as the district is formed, the board shall cause a survey of the contemplated improvements to be made, or adopt a survey already made, and shall also cause a map of the survey, and plans and specifications showing the improvements in detail, to be prepared, and they shall adopt those surveys, maps, plans, and specifications, and thereafter all improvements shall be made in accordance with the surveys, maps, plans, and specifications so adopted; provided, that at any time after the adoption of said surveys, maps, plans, and specifications, and before the commissioner’s report of assessment of benefits and award of damages has been finally adopted and confirmed by the board, the board may rescind their action in adopting those surveys, maps, plans, and specifications, and may modify the same or adopt others in their place, in which case a new assessment shall be made, or may, by a four-fifths vote of the members, abandon the contemplated improvement and dissolve the protection district, in which case the expenses already incurred on behalf of the district shall be a county charge.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 18.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

20942.

The board of supervisors shall determine the amount of work to be done in each year and the place where such work is to be done, and may let a contract for any portion of such work that they may think proper. When the work is let by contract, either as a whole work or for a portion thereof, the board shall give notice, by publication thereof, not less than 10 days, in a newspaper published in such county, calling for bids for the construction of such work, or of any portion thereof; if less than the whole work is advertised, then the portion so advertised must be particularly described in such notice. Said notice shall set forth that plans and specifications can be seen at the office of the board, and that the board will receive sealed proposals therefor, and that the contract will be let to the lowest responsible bidder, stating the time and place for opening said proposal, and how such sealed proposals shall be addressed, which, at the time and place appointed, shall be opened, and, as soon thereafter as convenient, the board shall let said work, either in portions or as a whole, to the lowest responsible bidder; or they may reject any and all bids and readvertise for proposals. Any person or persons to whom a contract may be awarded shall enter into a bond, with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the board, payable to said county for the use of such protection district, for double the amount of the contract price, conditioned for the faithful performance of said contract. The work shall be done under the direction and to the satisfaction of the board of supervisors.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 63. Drainage Districts [20950. - 20952.]

20950.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by drainage districts, as provided for in Chapter 238 of the Statutes of 1903.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20951.

After adopting a plan for such conduits, drains, pumping plants, watergates, and other works which are provided for in this act, the board of directors shall give notice by publication thereof not less than 10 days as required in Section 6062a of the Government Code, in one newspaper published in each of the counties composing the district (provided, a newspaper is published therein) and in such other newspapers as they may deem advisable, calling for bids for the construction of such work, or of any portion thereof; if less than the whole work is advertised, then the portion so advertised must be particularly described in such notice. Said notice shall set forth that plans and specifications can be seen at the office of the board, and that the board will receive sealed proposals therefor, and that the contract will be let to the lowest responsible bidder, stating the time and place for opening said proposals, which, at the time and place appointed shall be opened in public; and as soon as convenient thereafter the board shall let said work, whether in portions or as a whole, to the lowest responsible bidder; or they may reject any or all bids and readvertise for proposals, or may proceed to construct the work under their own superintendence. Contracts for the purchase of material shall be awarded, or the board may reject any or all bids, and may readvertise for proposals. Any person or persons to whom a contract may be awarded shall enter into a bond, with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the board, payable to said district for its use for 50 percent of the amount of the contract price, conditioned for the faithful performance of the contract. The work shall be done under the direction and to the satisfaction of the engineer, and be approved by the board.

Contracts under this section calling for an expenditure of less than three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) may be let without bid.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20952.

The district may enter into contracts or agreements with the State of California or other public districts for the joint construction of and for the joint use and maintenance of evaporation ponds or other works for the disposal of saline drainage waters and for the disposal of salts and other residues developed from the operation of such works.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 64. Levee Districts [20960. - 20961.]

20960.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by levee districts as provided for in Chapter 310 of the Statutes of 1905.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20961.

No levees, dikes, or other works for the benefit of the district may be constructed or repaired except on the order of the board of trustees of the district and when the repair or construction will exceed five hundred dollars ($500) the work may be performed only under a contract let, after reasonable notice given by the board of trustees by publishing the notice at least once a week for two weeks in a newspaper published and circulated in the county and designated by the board of trustees. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened at the time specified in the notice, and the contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The board may, however, reject any and all bids. The contract and bond for its performance must be entered into and approved by the board of trustees, except, however, in cases of emergency, by the unanimous consent of the whole board of trustees they may proceed at once to replace or repair levees, dikes, or other works without notice. In case of emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). Prior to the publication of the notice of the letting of any contract for the erection or repair of dikes, levees, or other works, the board of trustees shall have prepared by a competent engineer, plans and specifications and working details of the work, that shall be adopted by the board of trustees and filed in the office of the board and shall be subject to inspection by any person for at least two weeks prior to the date of the letting of the contract. The board of trustees shall appoint an engineer to supervise the construction, repair, or other works to be done under the plans and specifications and no claim shall be allowed for any work done under any contract let under those plans and specifications without a certificate being first filed in the office of the board of trustees and in the office of the clerk of the board of supervisors of the county signed by the engineer, certifying that the work has been completed and constructed according to the plans and specifications and the terms of the contract. The engineer shall be paid the compensation agreed upon by the board of trustees and the compensation shall be paid in the same manner as other claims against the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 19.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 65. Protection Districts [20970. - 20971.]

20970.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by protection districts as provided for in Chapter 25 of the Statutes of 1907.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20971.

After the adoption of a plan of works and providing funds for the construction of the same, and securing the necessary rights of way as in this act provided, the board of directors shall give notice by publication thereof not less than 20 days in one newspaper published in each of the counties composing the district (provided, a newspaper is published therein) and in such other newspapers as they may deem advisable, calling for bids for the construction of such work, or of any portion thereof; if less than the whole work is advertised, then the portion so advertised must be particularly described in such notice. Said notice shall set forth that plans and specifications can be seen at the office of the board, and that the board will receive sealed proposals therefor, and that the contract will be let to the lowest responsible bidder, stating the time and place for opening said proposals, which, at the time and place appointed shall be opened in public; and as soon as convenient thereafter the board shall let said work, whether in portions or as a whole, to the lowest responsible bidder; or they may reject any and all bids and readvertise for proposals, or may proceed to construct the work under their own superintendence. Contracts for the purchase of material shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. Any person or persons to whom a contract may be awarded shall enter into a bond, with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the board, payable to said district for its use for 50 percent of the amount of the contract price, conditioned for the faithful performance of said contract. The work shall be done under the direction and to the satisfaction of the engineer, and be approved by the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 66. Storm Water Districts [20980. - 20981.]

20980.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by storm water districts as provided for in Chapter 222 of the Statutes of 1909.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20981.

All work of construction, repair, or maintenance, the cost whereof exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500), shall be done by contract; and all contracts shall be let by the board to the lowest responsible bidder, who will give bond for the faithful performance thereof satisfactory to the board, after advertisement for bids published by their clerk pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code in some newspaper of general circulation, designated by the board and published in the county in which the district or some part thereof is situated, specifying the time and place for the opening of bids, and the particular work to be bid for; provided, however, that the board may reject all bids and readvertise, and may by unanimous action in cases of great emergency, the nature of which shall be entered on their minutes, proceed at once to replace or repair any of the works or improvements of the district without advertisement.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 67. Los Angeles County Flood Control District [20990. - 20998.]

20990.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District as provided for in Chapter 755 of the Statutes of 1915.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20991.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of supervisors of the district shall advertise by five or more insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation, or by two or more insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the improvement or work. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds, to be approved by the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of
 all claims for labor and material. The bonds shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and shall be subject to the provisions of that chapter. The board shall have the right to reject any bid not suitable to the best interests of the district. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of channel protection, dam protection, temporary work, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. Emergency work may also be done by negotiated contract without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 55.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

20992.

It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent of Los Angeles County, and the ex officio purchasing agent of Los Angeles County Flood Control District, unless otherwise ordered by the board of supervisors, to purchase for the district all materials, supplies, equipment, and other personal property necessary to carry out the purposes of this act, except emergency purchases, and to engage independent contractors to perform sundry services for the district, where the aggregate cost of such work, exclusive of materials to be furnished by the district, does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). The purchasing agent shall make all such purchases and contracts upon proper requisition therefor, signed by the chief engineer of the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20993.

Any improvement for which bonds are voted under the provisions of this act shall be made in conformity with the report, plans, specifications, and map theretofore adopted, as above specified, unless the doing of any such work described in the report shall be prohibited by law, or be rendered contrary to the best interests of the district by some change of conditions in relation thereto, in which event the board of supervisors may, by vote of four-fifths of all the members thereof, order necessary changes made in such proposed work or improvements, and may cause new plans and specifications to be made and adopted therefor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20994.

Any work or improvement provided for in this act may be located, constructed, and maintained in, along, or across any public road or highway in the County of Los Angeles, in such manner as to afford security for life and property, but the board of supervisors of the district shall restore or cause to be restored such road or highway to its former state as near as may be, so as not to impair its usefulness.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20995.

The plans and specifications for any work proposed to be done, or improvements to be made, under this act, in any municipality in the district shall first be approved by the legislative body of such municipality before the commencement of such work or improvements, and before any contract shall be let therefor; provided, that in the event such legislative body shall refuse or neglect to approve the said plans and specifications for such work or improvement within 30 days after being requested by the board of supervisors so to do, then the board of supervisors shall omit the doing of such work or making of such improvements within such municipality, and such omission shall not affect the validity of its proceedings under this
 act, and the funds which were to be expended for such proposed work or improvement in the municipality may be expended elsewhere by the board of supervisors for carrying out the purposes of this act. For the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, the governing body of the district may delegate these duties to the chief engineer of the district on a project-by-project basis. This additional delegation right for the Los Angeles County Flood Control District shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2020, Ch. 371, Sec. 25.   (SB 1473)   Effective January 1, 2021.)
-------------------------------------------

20996.

The governing body of the district may, upon receiving request therefor, cause to be designed and inserted in the specifications and contract for any flood control channel or storm drain, as to any portion thereof planned to be constructed under this act as an open channel, provision for the construction in conjunction therewith of facilities for the covering or crossing over of any such portion, or a part of such portion if, in the judgment of the governing body, such crossing or covering will not impair the usefulness of the flood control channel or storm drain and will not be otherwise adverse to the best interests of the district; provided, however, that as to any such requested covering or crossing facilities the costs of design and construction are to be fully borne by the requesting party or parties.

The governing body of the district may expend funds of the district for the construction of facilities for the covering or crossing over of any portion of existing flood control channels or storm drains of the district whenever it determines such expenditures to be in the best interests of the district. The district may also expend for such purpose any funds provided it by any local agency within the district for the construction of facilities for the covering or crossing over of any portion of existing flood control channels or storm drains of the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20997.

The governing body of the district shall have full authority to cause to be inserted in specifications and contracts for any flood control work financed or paid for in whole or in part out of moneys obtained from the United States of America or any department or agency thereof as a loan, grant, or appropriation, the provisions or terms as may be prescribed by the United States of America or such department or agency as a condition upon which the federal funds are loaned, granted, or appropriated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

20998.

(a) The board of supervisors of the district may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the chief engineer or other district officer to order changes or additions in the work being performed under contracts made pursuant to this article in an amount not to exceed:

(1) For contracts whose original cost is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(2) For contracts whose original cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the amount of the change or addition shall
 not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract.

(3) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract that is in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). Notwithstanding subdivision (b), no change or addition shall exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(b) The County of Los Angeles may elect to be subject to all of the following provisions: 

(1) For contracts whose original cost exceeds twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), the extra cost for any change
 or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(2) For contracts whose original cost exceeds fifty million dollars ($50,000,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000), adjusted annually to reflect the percentage change in the California Consumer Price Index.

(3) If the board of supervisors delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the decision by the county engineer or other county officer whom authority was delegated to shall be binding on the County of Los Angeles,
 and all existing protest and grievance procedures regarding that decision remain valid. 

(4) At the time the board delegates authority in the manner specified in subdivision (a) with regard to the contract costs specified in this subdivision, the board shall implement appropriate measures to prevent fraud and ensure accountability for that delegated authority.

(5) This subdivision does not apply if the sum of the contracts modified under this subdivision, subdivision (c) of Section 20142, subdivision (b) of Section 20395, subdivision (e) of Section 20405, and subdivision (b) of Section 20614, exceeds seven contracts.

(6) If a contract is modified under this subdivision, the County of Los Angeles shall provide a review
 report to the Assembly Committee on Local Government and the Senate Committee on Governance and Finance no later than July 1, 2026.

(c) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2027, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 9.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.   See later operative version added by Sec. 10 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 95.)
-------------------------------------------

20998.

The board of supervisors of the district may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the chief engineer or other district officer to order changes or additions in the work being performed under contracts made pursuant to this article in an amount not to exceed:

(a) For contracts whose original cost is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(b) For contracts whose original cost is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the amount of the change or addition shall not exceed 10
 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract.

(c) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the cost of the original contract that is in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any change or addition exceed two hundred ten thousand dollars ($210,000).

(d) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2027.

(History: Repealed (in Sec. 9) and added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 95, Sec. 10.   (AB 712)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2027, by its own provisions.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 68. Drainage Districts [21000. - 21013.]

21000.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by drainage districts as provided for in Chapter 354 of the Statutes of 1919.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21001.

By resolution or resolutions the board of supervisors may order the work to be done, and if it does so it shall fix a time for receiving proposals or bids for doing the work, and shall direct the clerk to give notice, inviting sealed proposals or bids. Such notice shall include a statement that the work is to be done under the provisions of the Drainage District Improvement Act of 1919 and according to the plans and specifications on file, except insofar as such plans and specifications were changed by the board of supervisors in conclusion of the hearing on the resolution of intention in said act
 provided; to which said act, to the resolution of intention and all proceedings had thereunder the attention of bidders is hereby directed, and which are by this reference made part of said notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21002.

The notice inviting sealed proposals or bids shall be published by at least two insertions in the newspaper or newspapers designated in the resolution of intention, and (though it need not be simultaneously) a copy or copies of the same shall be posted and kept posted for five days, at or near the chamber door of the board of supervisors. All proposals or bids shall be accompanied by a check, payable to the county, certified by a responsible bank in an amount not less than 10 percent of the aggregate of the proposal or bid, or by a bond in such amount running to the county, signed by the bidder,
 with two sureties qualifying before an officer competent to administer oaths, each in said amount over and above all statutory exemptions, or executed by some bonding company acceptable to said board of supervisors. Said proposals or bids shall be delivered to the clerk of said board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21003.

The board shall, in open session, open and examine and declare the same. No proposal or bid shall be considered unless accompanied by such check or such bond in terms satisfactory to the board. The board may reject any and all proposals or bids should it deem it for the public good, and shall reject all proposals or bids other than the lowest regular proposal or bid of any responsible bidder, and may award the contract for said work to the lowest responsible bidder at the price named in his or her bid.

A notice of such award, attested by the clerk of the
 board of supervisors shall be transmitted to the successful bidder by mail by the clerk of the board of supervisors, and shall also be published and posted in a manner herein provided as to the notice inviting proposals or bids.

The check or bond accompanying such accepted proposal or bid shall be kept by the clerk of said board until the contract for doing said work, as hereinafter provided, has been entered into. Checks or bonds of unsuccessful bidders shall be returned by the clerk of said board. If said successful bidder fails, neglects or refuses for 15 days after being awarded the contract to execute the same, the certified check accompanying his bid, and the amount thereof shall be declared forfeited to the county, and may be collected by it and paid into the interest and sinking fund of the district, and any bond forfeited may be prosecuted, and the amount thereof collected and paid into said fund.

Before being
 entitled to a contract the bidder to whom the award thereof has been made must advance and pay to the clerk of the board of supervisors, the costs and expenses of publishing and posting the resolutions, notices and orders required under this act to be made, which have been made, given, posted, or published in the proceeding.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21004.

Any person interested in the said proceeding may at any time within 10 days from the first publication of the notice of award file with the clerk of the board of supervisors a statement in writing specifying any particulars in which he or she may be aggrieved by the said proposed work and any and all objections he or she may have to the regularity or legality of the proceedings theretofore had or taken. The failure to file such written statement shall constitute and be a complete waiving of each and every objection to the proceedings theretofore had or taken and an estoppel and bar to any and all
 claims that the same or any portion thereof have been or are irregular, illegal, defective, erroneous, or faulty; provided, that the resolution of intention provided for in Section 6 of Chapter 354 of the Statutes of 1919 has been adopted and published.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21005.

If for 20 days after the first publication of the notice of award, the awardee fails, neglects, or refuses to execute a contract for the same, the board of supervisors may direct the clerk of the board to give notice as in the first instance, inviting sealed proposals or bids, and thereupon after receiving bids shall award the contract as in the first instance; and the said board shall proceed in the same manner in the case of the default of a second or subsequent awardee.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21006.

The chairman of the board of supervisors is hereby authorized, in the name of the county to execute the contract with the awardee thereof, and to receive and approve all bonds required by this act on the part of the awardee, and shall, by the terms of said contract, fix the time for the beginning of the work, which shall not be more than 20 days from the date thereof. The contract shall provide that the work shall be prosecuted with diligence until completed, and shall fix a time for such completion. Such time of completion may be extended from time to time by the board of supervisors, in its
 discretion, and by resolution, entered by the clerk in the minutes of said board, a copy of which shall by said clerk be endorsed upon or annexed to the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21007.

Before the execution of such contract, a bond shall be executed and filed, running to the county, in an amount not less than one-half of the contract price of the work, signed by the contractor and two or more sureties, who, unless surety companies, shall qualify before an officer entitled to administer the oath, in a sum aggregately equal to the amount of the bond, each surety in the amount for which he or she becomes surety. Such bond shall be conditioned for the faithful execution of the contract by the contractor, and for the payment by him or her for all labor and materials furnished for or in
 the doing of the work. The form and sufficiency of said bond shall be passed upon by some member of the board of supervisors, and such bond shall inure as well to the benefit of any and all persons furnishing labor or materials for the work as to that of the county.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21008.

By said contract the county shall undertake that the board of supervisors will, upon the fulfillment and performance of the contract on the part of the contractor, and under the provisions of the Drainage District Improvement Act of 1919 take all steps, in or by said act authorized to be taken, to effect the issuing by the county treasurer of the bonds in said act authorized to be issued, and provide a fund for their payment, as in or by said act prescribed. The contract shall state that in no case shall the county be liable thereunder, nor any officer thereof be beholden thereunder except for the
 discharge of official duty under the law.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21009.

If the contractor shall fail to begin in good faith the work provided for in said contract within the time in said contract set forth, or shall fail thereafter to prosecute said work in a workmanlike and diligent manner, or shall fail in any other respect to carry out the terms of said contract, then the board of supervisors shall cause written notice to be served upon said contractor, specifying the particular areas in which he or she is not fulfilling the requirements of said contract, and if for a period of three days thereafter said contractor shall fail to remedy the defects set forth in said
 notice, and to prosecute said work thereafter with diligence and in a workmanlike manner, then the board of supervisors shall either take over said contract and complete said work, or shall relet said contract, without the necessity of advertising for bids, and cause the work to be completed, and shall declare the bond given by said contractor forfeited and order suit brought thereon, and all moneys collected therefrom shall be paid into the interest and sinking fund of the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21010.

If the contractor fails to pay for any labor or material furnished for or in the doing of said work by any person, such person may within 90 days after the making of the final order hereinafter referred to, file with the county treasurer a verified statement of such facts, and such person may thereafter, within six months after the filing of such statement, bring an action on said bond in his or her own name, or if the person has assigned his or her claim, the action may be brought in the name of the assignee; provided, however, that the right of the county to recover on said bond shall be superior
 to the rights of any such person to recover thereon; provided, moreover, that if such statement shall be filed before the expiration of 20 days from the making of such final order, then the county treasurer shall be authorized to withhold from the contractor sufficient of the bonds, issued as herein provided, to satisfy said claim, and costs, which can reasonably be anticipated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21011.

(a) As soon as in good faith may be done, there shall be filed with the clerk of the board of supervisors a declaration that the work has been completed according to the contract, together with an itemized statement of all the incidental costs and expenses of the work and the cost of the proceedings inclusive of the estimated cost of publishing the notice of final hearing hereinafter provided. The aggregate amount of such items shall be stated, and also the amount due under the contract; and also the gross sum for a bond issue representing the entire amount thereof, as claimed
 by the contractor. The said declaration and statements shall be signed and verified by the engineer of construction and by the contractor or by some person cognizant of the facts signing on his or her behalf and stating why he or she, instead of the contractor, so signs and verifies. Either signer may except from his or her signature and verification any amount or item to which he or she does not assent. The chairman of the board of supervisors shall fix a time for a hearing, to be known as the final hearing, for the purpose of determining whether the work shall be accepted as completed according to the contract, and for determining the aggregate amount for which bonds shall be issued representing the total costs of the work and the incidental costs and expenses of the work and the proceedings, all of which have been charged to and are payable by the contractor. Notice of such hearing shall be given and may, in form, and shall, in substance be as follows (filling the blanks): NOTICE OF FINAL HEARING.In the matter of Drainage District Improvement No. ____.
Notice is hereby given that a final hearing in the above named matter will be had at the hour of ____m. on the ____ day of ____, 19__, at the chamber of the Board of Supervisors of the County of ____, State of California, for the purpose of determining whether the work done under the contract with
 under Resolution of Intention No. ____ in Drainage Improvement District No. ____ of the County of ____ shall be accepted as being performed according to the contract, and for determining the aggregate amount for which bonds shall issue representing the cost of such work, including the incidental costs and expenses
 of the work and the proceedings, of which a statement has been filed with the Clerk of said Board of Supervisors of the County of ____ to which statement the attention of all persons interested is hereby directed. of the Board of Supervisors of the Countyof ________Attest:Clerk of said Board of Supervisors(b) Such notice shall be signed by the chairman of the board of supervisors and attested by the clerk of the board of supervisors and published by at least two insertions in the newspaper or newspapers designated in the resolution of intention, and a copy or copies thereof posted and kept posted for two days at or near the chamber door of the board of supervisors, the first day of such publication and that of such posting (they need not be simultaneous) to be not less than five days before the day in said notice specified for the hearing. Proof of such publication shall be made by affidavit or affidavits, and the same shall be filed. If a quorum is not present at the time specified in the notice of the hearing, the members of the board then present may continue the hearing; and at all stages the hearing may, by resolution
 entered in the minutes, be continued from time to time. At any time before the day in said notice specified for the hearing any property owner may file written objection to the acceptance of the work on the ground that the work has not been completed or done according to the contract, specifying in ordinary language the particulars in which the work has not been so completed or done. Any person interested in the proceeding, as of the interest of the contractor, shall be presumed to take issue with such objection and shall be heard accordingly. Questions as to the incidental costs or expenses of the work or the proceedings may be raised orally by any property owner within the district. Evidence may be adduced as to any of the matters to be determined, and in such order as the board may direct. If, when the matter has been fully heard, whether under, or in the absence of, objections, the board of supervisors is of the opinion that the work has not been completed or done according to the contract, it shall in
 writing specify what must be done in order to complete the work, and shall, by an order or resolution to be entered in its minutes, continue the further hearing of the whole matter to a specified day, expressly stating that such continuance is for the purpose of enabling the contractor to complete his or her contract. On said continued hearing, the objections to the work filed before the day of the first hearing shall continue in force, and evidence shall be received, if offered, as to what has been done by way of completing the contract in the particulars specified in the order of the board on the said continuance of the hearing. If, upon such continued hearing, the board is of the opinion that the work is still uncompleted in the particulars as to which it was ordered to be completed, it shall be discretional with said board to order or refuse a second continuance of the hearing. If the board does order such second continuance, it shall be ordered in the same manner, with like effect as upon the first
 continuance, and likewise as to a second and any other or further continuance. Objections to any item of incidental costs and expenses shall pend and be heard on said day, or at any continued hearing had as above in this section provided. Every continuance of said hearing for the purpose of enabling the contractor to complete his or her contract or the work shall continue or revive such powers in the proceeding as the board of supervisors had under the provisions of this act, at the time of the filing of the contractor’s declaration that the work was completed, as above provided, and also operate to extend the time for the completion of said contract in such manner that its completion within the time to which the hearing is continued, shall be as valid performance of such contract as if completed at the time of filing such declaration.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21012.

Whenever upon the hearing in Section 21011 provided, whether original or continued, the board shall be of the opinion that the work has been completed and done according to the contract, said board shall by resolution to be entered upon its minutes so declare, and shall in said resolution declare that the work is accepted and the amount of the contract price for doing the work and the amount of the incidental costs and expenses of the work and proceedings and the aggregate amount for which bonds are to be issued and shall make final order that bonds be issued therefor as hereinafter provided. The
 decision and determination of said board at the hearing provided for in Section 21011 shall, as to all matters determined at said hearing and as to all errors, informalities, irregularities, or omissions which said board might have avoided or remedied during the progress of the proceedings, or which it can at that time remedy, be final and conclusive upon all persons entitled to be heard before said board on said matters, and no assessment or tax levied for the payment of the bonds, and the interest thereon, to be issued for said work and expenses, shall be held invalid by any court for any error, informality, omission, or other defect in the proceedings where the resolution of intention has been actually published as in this act provided, before the said board shall have ordered the work to be done.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21013.

(a) Whenever any court of competent jurisdiction shall determine that any contract purporting to have been made, or any proceedings, steps or actions purporting to have been taken, or any bond or bonds issued under this act, is or are void, invalid or unenforceable, or shall for any cause enjoin the issuance of any bonds proposed to be issued under this act, or shall enjoin the performance of the work or improvement or the making of an assessment upon the lands within the district, or shall quiet title of any lot or parcel of land against the lien of any such bonds or
 assessments, said court shall also determine whether any work has been done or improvements have been made in good faith by any contractor under said invalid contract or proceeding or under any contract pursuant to which bonds were issued, or are proposed to be issued, and if so what part, if any, of said work or improvement was of such kind as might have been ordered under the provisions of this act. If the court shall find that any work or improvement of such kind as might have been ordered under this act has been done or performed in good faith by any contractor under or in pursuance to a contract purporting to have been made under the provisions of this act, then the said court shall direct the board of supervisors, who conducted the proceeding, to take proceedings as in this section provided for the issuing of new bonds to cover the reasonable value of said work or improvement. The board of supervisors may also without any decree of court, upon written application of a contractor, who may have done or
 performed in good faith any work or improvement pursuant to a contract purporting to have been made under this act, or of the assignee of such contractor, after the work or improvement shall have been accepted, determine that the proceeding authorizing said work or improvement or the acceptance thereof are for any reason invalid, and direct that new proceedings be initiated as provided in this section for the issuance of bonds to cover the reasonable value of so much of said work or improvement as is of a kind which might have been ordered and performed under this act.

(b) It is hereby declared to be the true intent and meaning of this section to make the cost and expenses of all work or improvements made or to be made through an attempted compliance with the provisions of this act payable by the lands benefited or to be benefited by such work or improvement, by the issuance of new bonds to defray the expenses thereof, but that all payments of
 principal or interest on void or unenforceable assessments or bonds shall be credited to the property against which they were assessed or attempted to be assessed.

(c) Upon a decree of court or an order of the board of supervisors having been made as above provided, said board shall cause to be made by the county surveyor, or some other county officer or by some other competent person appointed by it for that purpose, a report for a proposed new bond issue. Said report shall set forth a description of the work or improvement done or performed by said contractor or his or her assignee pursuant to the contract referred to in said decree of court or order of the board, which work or improvement has been found by said court or said board to be of such kind as might have been ordered under this act, and shall state the reasonable value of said work or improvement (which shall not exceed the aggregate of the original contract price for said work or
 improvement, together with the incidental expenses of the original proceedings for said work or improvement, and if the work or improvement has been accepted it shall also include interest upon said total from the date of the original acceptance of said work or improvement by the board of supervisors at the same rate proposed for the new bond issue). Said report shall contain a description of the district benefited by said improvement. In the event that the original proceedings contemplated an assessment upon lands within the district in accordance with the provisions of Section 12 of Chapter 354 of the Statutes of 1919 of this act then said report shall contain a proposed assessment of each separate parcel of land within the district benefited by said improvement, which assessment shall conform as nearly as may be with the report required by Section 12 of Chapter 354 of the Statutes of 1919 hereof, and shall be accompanied by a map or plat as therein provided.

(d) In the event any payments have been made on the principal or interest of any bonds previously issued, which have been declared invalid, by the payment of any special assessment taxes, by the owners of land within the assessment district, the amounts of such payments shall be ascertained and deducted from the amount for which new bonds are to be issued under this section and said report shall set forth the amount of the payments made and state that a credit or offset is to be made for said amount in the issuance of such new bonds.

(e) Upon the filing of said report the board of supervisors shall fix a day, hour, and place, for a hearing thereon, which time shall not be less than 20 days after the time of filing said report, and shall direct the clerk of the board to give notice of the filing of the report and of the hearing. The clerk shall thereupon cause notice of the time and
 place of such hearing to be given by publication in the newspaper designated in the resolution of intention by at least two insertions therein not more than eight days apart. When, before the day of hearing specified in said notice, 20 days, including Sundays and holidays, have elapsed since the first publication of said notice the board of supervisors shall have acquired power to proceed with such hearing. Said notice shall state the fact of the filing of said report and shall contain (a) a general description of the location and extent of the work or improvement sufficient to identify the same; (b) a description of the district benefited by said work or improvement as contained in said report; (c) either a statement that said report contains an assessment proposed to be levied on each separate parcel of land within said district to retire the bonds proposed to be issued and to pay the interest thereon for each year during which said assessment shall continue, or a description of the zones, if any, into
 which such district is to be divided, and a statement of the percentage to be raised from the land in each of such zones each year for the payment of the installments of principal and interest on the bonds proposed to be issued; (d) a statement of the reasonable value of the work or improvement together with the incidental expenses of the original proceedings and the amount of interest, if any, upon said total; (e) the amount of the payments of principal or interest made upon the bonds previously issued, if any, and the credit or offset to be deducted in the issuance of such new bonds; (f) the total amount of the proposed new bond issue and a description of the bonds proposed to be issued, which bonds shall be as nearly as possible the same as to maturity, rate of interest, and other particulars as the bonds described in the original proceedings for said work or improvement, correcting any errors or irregularities, that may have existed in the bonds in said original proceedings.

(f) Said notice shall advise all persons interested that at the time fixed for the hearing of the report or at the time to which the hearing may be continued any person may appear and be heard upon any of the matters set forth in the report. The board of supervisors shall have power to confirm said report and to revise, correct, or modify the same in respect to any of the matters therein contained either as to the amount or character of the work or improvement done or the reasonable value thereof, the extent of the district to be benefited thereby, the amount of assessment levied upon any particular parcel of land within such district, the zones, if any, into which said district is divided, the percentages to be raised in each or any of said zones, the amount of deductions or offsets by reason of payments of principal or interest upon previously issued bonds, the amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maturity or rate of the interest
 thereon, or as to any other matter set forth in said report.

(g) At the conclusion of the hearing the board of supervisors shall adopt a resolution declaring its findings and determinations in the matter, which shall be final and conclusive upon all persons in all proceedings as to all matters so found and determined. If no changes are made in the matters set forth in said report it shall be sufficient in said resolution to declare that said report is confirmed and that bonds shall be issued as therein provided, but if any changes are made such changes shall be set forth and it may be declared that said report is confirmed as so modified by the changes set forth. The clerk of the board of supervisors shall transmit an attested copy of said resolution to the treasurer and upon receipt of the same the treasurer shall immediately proceed to issue the bonds as therein ordered, which said bonds shall be dated as of the date of the adoption of said
 resolution. Said bonds shall be issued and signed in all respects by the same officers and in the same manner and form as if issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 16 of Chapter 354 of the Statutes of 1919. Said bonds by their issuance shall be conclusive evidence of the regularity of all proceedings prior thereto under this act and after the same are issued no assessment or tax levied or collected for the purpose of paying the principal or interest on said bonds shall be held illegal or set aside or refunded by reason of any error, informality, irregularity, omission, or defect in any of the proceedings prior to the issuance of said bonds, nor shall any action or proceedings be thereafter commenced or maintained to cancel or set aside said bonds or prevent the payment thereof or the levy, collection or enforcement of any assessment or taxes for such payment.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 69. Orange County Flood Control District [21020. - 21024.]

21020.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Orange County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 723 of the Statutes of 1927.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21020.2.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of supervisors of the district shall advertise by five or more insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation, or by two or more insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or work of the proposed improvement or work and may let by contract separately, any part of the work or improvement. The board shall have the right to reject any bids not suitable to the best interests of the district. In the event all proposals are rejected, or no proposals are received pursuant to advertising, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district shall have power to purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work being done by it either under contract or by force account whenever the estimated costs of the materials or supplies do not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000); and provided further, that in case of emergency work, the district shall have the power to purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids therefor, materials and supplies for use in any work, even though the cost thereof should exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 21.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

21020.5.

Any improvement for which bonds are voted under the provisions of the act shall be made in conformity with the report, plans, specifications, and map theretofore adopted, as above specified, unless the doing of any of the work described in the report shall be prohibited by law, or be rendered contrary to the best interests of the district by some change of conditions in relation thereto, in which event the board of supervisors may, by a vote of four-fifths of all the members thereof, order necessary changes made in the proposed work or improvements, and may cause new plans and specifications to be made and adopted therefor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21020.8.

Any work or improvements provided for in the act may be located, constructed, and maintained in, along, or across any public road or highway in the County of Orange, in the manner as to afford security for life and property, but the board of supervisors of the district shall restore or cause to be restored any public road or highway to its former state as near as may be, so as not to impair its usefulness.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 555.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

21020.9.

The plans and specifications for any work proposed to be done, or improvements to be made, under the act, in any municipality in the district shall first be approved by the legislative body of the municipality before the commencement of the work or improvements, and before any contract shall be let therefor; provided, that in the event the legislative body shall refuse or neglect to approve the plans and specifications for the work or improvement within 30 days after being requested by the board of supervisors so to do, then the board of supervisors shall omit the doing of the work or making of the improvements within the municipality, and the omission shall not affect the validity of its proceedings under the act, and the funds which were to be expended for the proposed work or improvement in the municipality may be expended elsewhere by the board of supervisors for carrying out the purposes of the act.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21021.

Every contract entered into by the district for construction or improvements shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 303 of the Statutes of 1919, as amended; and the board of supervisors of the district shall require the contractor to file with it good and sufficient bonds conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material in connection therewith in accordance with the provisions of that act.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21022.

The contract shall be entered into by the engineer, and the assessment and warrant, when confirmed, shall be recorded in the office of the engineer.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21023.

The governing body of said district shall have full authority to cause to be inserted in specifications and contracts for any flood control work financed or paid for in whole or in part out of moneys obtained from the United States, or any department or agency thereof, as a loan, grant or appropriation, such provisions or terms as may be prescribed by the United States, or such department or agency, as a condition upon which such federal funds are loaned, granted, or appropriated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21024.

Emergency work, found by the board of supervisors to be necessary, may be done by negotiated contract without advertising for bids. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 22.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 70. American River Flood Control District [21030. - 21031.]

21030.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the American River Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 808 of the Statutes of 1927.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21031.

(a) In all work of improvement or repair of any of the works or property of the district and in the furnishing of materials or supplies therefor, when the expenditures required exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), the work shall be done by contract, and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, after notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the district for at least two insertions in a weekly newspaper or at least 10 insertions in a daily newspaper; the notices shall state the work contemplated or the materials or supplies required, or both. The board of trustees may reject any bid presented and readvertise in their discretion. The board may declare and determine that in its opinion the work in question can be performed more economically by day labor or the materials or supplies can be furnished at a lower price in the open market, and they may proceed to have the work done or the materials purchased without further observance of the foregoing provisions of this section.

(b) In case of an emergency, the board of trustees may declare a state of great public emergency and proceed to have all necessary work done and materials and supplies furnished without further observance of the foregoing provisions of this section. If notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) None of the foregoing provisions of this section apply to work done by contract with the United States, the State of California, or any political subdivision, or public agency thereof. Any work of improvement or repair provided for in this article may be located, constructed and maintained in, along, or across any railroad, public road, or highway in the County of Sacramento, in a manner that ensures security for life and property. The board of trustees shall restore or cause to be restored the road or highway to its former state as near as possible to preserve its usefulness.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 9.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 71. Orange County Water District [21040. - 21045.]

21040.

This article shall apply to contracts by the Orange County Water District, as provided for in Chapter 924 of the Statutes of 1933.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 556.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

21041.

The district shall not be bound by any contract except as hereinafter provided unless the same shall be made in writing approved by resolution of the board of directors and properly executed by its officers who have been so authorized to do by the district. The approval of the form of all contracts shall be endorsed thereon by an attorney for the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21042.

The district may prescribe methods for the construction of works and for the letting of contracts for any of the following purposes:

(a) The construction of works, structures, or equipment.

(b) The performance or furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies, necessary or convenient for carrying out any of the purposes of this act.

(c) The acquisition or disposal of any real or personal property.

When work is not to be done by the district itself by force account, and the amount involved is forty thousand dollars ($40,000), or more, any contract for the doing of the works shall be made by the district with the lowest and best bidder after the publication pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code in a newspaper of general circulation published within the district, of a notice calling for bids and fixing a period during which bids will be received, which shall be not less than 10 days after the publication of the notice. The district may reject any and all of the bids presented and may readvertise in its discretion. After rejecting bids, or if no bids are received, the district may determine and declare that in its opinion, based on estimates submitted by the engineer for the district, any work may be performed better or more economically by the district with its own employees, or after hiring additional employees. After the adoption of a resolution to this effect by at least seven affirmative votes of the directors of the district, the district may proceed to have that work done in the manner stated and without further observance of the provisions of this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 10.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

21043.

(a) Contracts may be let or work undertaken without advertising for bids in an emergency.

(b) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board of directors shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 29, Sec. 1.   Effective June 28, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

21044.

Contracts, in writing or otherwise, for the acquisition or disposal of any real property, for the acquisition or leasing of personal property, the purchase of water to replenish the groundwater supplies of the district, the repair of district equipment or structures, and for legal, engineering, and other professional services may be let without calling for competitive bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21045.

(a) The district shall require a person to whom the district awards a contract as a result of advertising for bids to enter into a bond, with good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the board, payable to the district for its use, for at least 25 percent of the amount of the estimated contract price, conditioned for the faithful performance of the contract.

(b) The general manager of the district may require a person to whom the district awards a contract without advertising for bids to enter into a bond in accordance with subdivision (a).

(c) The work shall be done under the direction and to the satisfaction of the district engineer, and be subject to approval by the board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1995, Ch. 29, Sec. 2.   Effective June 28, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 72. Municipal Water Districts [21050. - 21051.]

21050.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by municipal water districts, as provided for in Chapter 78 of the Statutes of 1935.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21051.

All contracts for the construction or extension of any waterworks, water system or water distribution system, or for furnishing labor, materials or supplies therefor as herein provided, shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder. The legislative body of such city shall advertise for two or more days in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in such city, inviting sealed proposals for furnishing labor, materials and supplies for the proposed waterworks, water system or water distribution system before any contract shall be made therefor. The said legislative body shall have the right to require such bonds as it may deem best from the successful bidder to insure the faithful performance of the contract, and shall also have the right to reject any and all bids; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the municipality itself from constructing or extending such waterworks, water system, or water distribution system and employing the labor necessary therefor, without a contractor; and provided further, that in municipalities operating under a charter heretofore or hereafter framed under the provisions of the Constitution of the State of California, all acts required to be performed subsequent to the sale of such bonds by this act, shall be done and performed by the proper body, board, officer, or commission of such municipality, as is required or authorized by such charter to perform such acts, and in case such charter also prescribes the manner of letting and entering into contracts for the furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies for the constructing or extending of such waterworks, water system, or water distribution system, the contracts therefor shall be let and entered into in conformity with such charter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 73. San Bernardino County Flood Control District [21060. - 21061.]

21060.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 73 of the Statutes of 1939.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21061.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article.

(b) The board of supervisors of the district shall advertise by five or more insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation, or by two or more insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the improvement or work. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds, to be approved
 by the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to that chapter.

(c) The board may also reject any bid not suitable to the best interests of the district. If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement therefor, or the work consists of channel protection, dam protection, temporary work, maintenance work, or of emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. Emergency work may also be done by negotiated contract without advertising for bids or requiring bonds. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with
 Section 22050).

(d) The board of supervisors, acting as the board of the district, may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the flood control engineer or other county officer to order changes or additions in work being performed under a construction contract. When so authorized, any change or addition in the work shall be ordered in writing by the flood control engineer, or other designated officer, and the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), nor 10 percent of the amount of any original contract that exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered
 shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract costs in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any such change or alteration exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 56.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 74. Ventura County Watershed Protection District [21070. - 21072.]

21070.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, as provided for in Chapter 44 of the Statutes of the 1944 Fourth Extraordinary Session.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 67, Sec. 2.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

21071.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work except as provided in this article estimated to cost in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of supervisors of the district shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of, the improvement or work before any contract shall be made for the improvement or work, and may let by contract separately any part of the work or improvement. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient
 bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material in connection with the contract. The bonds shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and be subject to the provisions of that chapter. The board shall also have the right to reject any and all bids. If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to the advertisement, the estimated cost of the work does not exceed the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work when necessary in order to protect life and property from impending flood damage, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account or negotiated contract.

(b) The district shall have the power to
 purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials, supplies, equipment, and other personal property for use in any work either under contract or by force account if the costs do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000). It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent of Ventura County, as the ex officio purchasing agent of the Ventura County Watershed Protection District, unless otherwise ordered by the board of supervisors, to purchase for the district all materials, supplies, equipment, and other personal property necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, and to engage independent contractors to perform sundry services for the district, if the aggregate cost of such work, exclusive of materials to be furnished by the district, does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(c) The purchasing agent shall make all purchases and contracts upon proper requisition, signed by the engineer-manager of the district, or his
 or her authorized representative.

(d) If the work consists of the maintenance or alteration of existing facilities, including electrical, painting, and roofing if the cost of labor and materials for the work according to the engineer’s estimate will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), and if the work is not of the type of work referred to in this section, the maintenance and alteration work shall be performed under a contract or contracts that shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner described in this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 57.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21072.

(a) Emergency work may be done by negotiated contract without advertising for bids or requiring bonds.

(b) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board of supervisors shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 67, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 75. Humboldt County Flood Control District [21080. - 21081.]

21080.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Humboldt County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 939 of the Statutes of 1945.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21081.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the whole of the work, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before
 any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract for the whole or it may divide such work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in such call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of such work does not exceed
 five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 58.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 76. Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21090. - 21091.]

21090.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1122 of the Statutes of 1945.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21091.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, except as otherwise provided in this act, estimated to cost in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of supervisors of the district shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the improvement or work before any contract is made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work or improvement. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned
 upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Sections 10223 and 10224, and Section 9554 of the Civil Code and be subject to those sections. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any improvement or unit of work either under contract or by force
 account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 59.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 77. San Luis Obispo County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21100. - 21102.]

21100.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Luis Obispo County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1294 of the Statutes of 1945.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21101.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the whole of the work, or shall be divided into parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract
 shall be made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or is to be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract for the whole as a unit or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not
 exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district shall have the power to purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 60.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21102.

The board shall have full authority to cause to be inserted in specifications and contracts for any flood control or other work financed or paid for in whole or in part out of moneys obtained from the United States, or any department or agency thereof, as a loan, grant, or appropriation, such provisions or terms as may be prescribed by the United States, or such department or agency, as a condition upon which such federal funds are loaned, granted, or appropriated.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 78. Santa Barbara County Water Agency [21110. - 21112.]

21110.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Barbara County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1501 of the Statutes of 1945.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21111.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of directors of the agency shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the agency’s jurisdiction inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the
 faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material. The faithful performance bond shall contain terms and conditions as the board may specify, and the payment bond shall be subject to the provisions of, and shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, as applicable. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids. In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors by unanimous vote of all members present may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The agency may purchase in the
 open market, and may authorize the Purchasing Agent of the County of Santa Barbara to purchase, without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(b) If the work to be performed by or on behalf of the agency does not involve an expenditure of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more, or if the work consists of emergency work, the agency may require a faithful performance bond. The agency may require a payment bond on work performed on behalf of the agency which does not involve an expenditure of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 61.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21112.

The provisions of this article shall have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 6 of Chapter 1501 of the Statutes of 1945, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 79. Monterey County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21120. - 21121.]

21120.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Monterey County Water Resources Agency, as provided for in the Monterey County Water Resources Agency Act.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1990, Ch. 1159, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

21121.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, if the cost according to the estimate of the engineer, exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders.

(b) The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the whole of the work, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the agency.

(c) The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and
 published in the territory of the agency inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is entered into. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the agency.

(d) The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material in connection with the contract. The bonds shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and are
 subject to the provisions of that title.

(e) The board may reject any bid. The board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account if any of the following requirements are met:

(1) All the projects are rejected.

(2) No proposals are received in response to the advertisement.

(3) The estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000).

(4) The work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(f) The agency may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(g) The Monterey County Board of Supervisors may grant to the board of directors, appointed pursuant to Section 49 of the Monterey County Water Resources Agency Act (Chapter 1159 of the Statutes of 1990), any of the powers or duties granted to the Monterey County Board of Supervisors by this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 62.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 80. Sonoma County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21130. - 21131.]

21130.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Sonoma County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 994 of the Statutes of 1949.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21131.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three placements in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract is made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
 contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material in connection therewith, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board may reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement therefor, or where the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the open market without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use
 in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work authorized and required under circumstances referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) This section does not apply to a contract entered into with the United States or the State of California or other governmental agency under the authority of Section 3 of Chapter 2126 of the Statutes of 1959, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(e) The district may rent or otherwise contract for equipment with or without an operator and use it on works of the district, if the contract is approved by the
 board.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 63.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 81. Mendocino County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21140. - 21141.]

21140.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Mendocino County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 995 of the Statutes of 1949.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21141.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and
 upon the payment of the claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000), or where the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the
 open market, without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract therefor to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 64.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 82. Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21150. - 21152.]

21150.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1275 of the Statutes of 1949.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21151.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), with or without the furnishing of materials or supplies, shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. Construction of improvements or works shall not be staged to avoid the bidding process. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the whole of the work, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is
 made. The board shall invite the bids by publishing a notice of the call for bids pursuant to Section 6062 or 6066 of the Government Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to
 reject any bid. In the event the engineer’s estimate is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less, or in the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement therefor, or in the event the work consists of channel protection or maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by day labor under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may acquire in the open market without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 65.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21152.

If any change or addition in the work being performed under a construction contract pursuant to this section is deemed necessary, the board may authorize the contractor to proceed with the change or addition without the formality of obtaining bids therefor, provided that the extra cost to the district shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), nor 10 percent of the amount of any original contract which exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). The board may, by board order, authorize the Director of Public Works or other district officer to order such changes or additions in the work being performed, provided that the above conditions are satisfied and that the cost of the change or addition does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). The authorization to the Director of Public Works or other district officer shall include the authority to grant any contract time extensions necessary in connection with the changes or additions. All changes or additions to the work shall be ordered in writing. If a change or addition in a contract awarded under the provisions of this section is requested by any person, firm, corporation, or public agency, other than the district, which person, firm, corporation, or public agency agrees to pay all of the cost of the change or addition, the board may, by board order, authorize the Director of Public Works or other district officer to direct the contractor to proceed with the change or addition without the formality of obtaining bids therefor, provided that the cost of the change or addition does not exceed 15 percent of the original contract price.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 83. Santa Clara Valley Water District [21160. - 21163.]

21160.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Clara Valley Water District, as provided for in Chapter 1405 of the Statutes of 1951.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21160.5.

As used in this article:

(a) “Board” means the board of directors of the Santa Clara Valley Water District.

(b) “District” means the Santa Clara Valley Water District.

(History: Added by Stats. 2019, Ch. 264, Sec. 1.   (AB 707)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

21161.

(a) For any improvement or unit of work done by district personnel, the estimated cost of the work shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), except under the following circumstances:

(1) The work consists of channel protection.

(2) The work consists of maintenance work as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 22002.

(3) The work consists of environmental preservation or habitat management.

(4) The work consists of emergency work.

(b) With the approval of the board, in accordance with board policy that has been adopted in an open meeting, any improvement or unit of work not performed by district personnel and estimated by the engineer to cost in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be done by contract and shall comply with the following formal competitive bidding
 process:

(1) All contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the whole of the work, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district.

(2) The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit for the whole thereof
 or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district.

(3) The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to that title.

(4) The board may reject any bid. If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received
 pursuant to advertisement,
 or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, environmental preservation or habitat management, or emergency work, the board may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account.

(c) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). 

(d) The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(e) The provisions of this section requiring competitive bidding and the award of contracts to the lowest responsible bidder are inapplicable to the extent the improvement or
 unit of work is to be performed on its own facilities by a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission.

(f) Notwithstanding any other law, the district may elect to participate in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000)).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2019, Ch. 264, Sec. 2.   (AB 707)   Effective January 1, 2020.)
-------------------------------------------

21162.

Notwithstanding any other law, upon the approval of the board of directors, and without the approval of the board of supervisors, the district may use, for contracts for the construction of a building or buildings and improvements directly related to the construction of a building or buildings, the procedures described in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 22160) as that chapter reads on January 1, 2018, or as it may be amended after that date.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 821, Sec. 3.   (AB 851)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

21163.

(a) As used in this section:

(1) (A) “Anderson Dam project” or “project” means any activity or work of construction to retrofit, repair, replace, or improve the safety of the Leroy Anderson Dam and Reservoir, owned by the Santa Clara Valley Water District and located in the County of Santa Clara, including any upstream or downstream construction, improvements, changes in operational activities, and flood protection measures that may be required to implement that activity or work.

(B) The “Anderson Dam project” or “project” includes any avoidance, minimization, or mitigation measures, including the Coyote Creek-related Phase 1 measures of the Fish and
 Aquatic Habitat Collaborative Effort, as described in the settlement agreement, determined to be appropriate by the district, in consultation with state and federal agencies identified as “responsible agencies” or “trustee agencies” pursuant to Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code.

(2) “Best value” means a procurement process whereby the selected bidder may be selected on the basis of objective criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders with the resulting selection representing the best combination of price and qualifications.

(3) “Best value contract” means a competitively bid contract entered into pursuant to this section.

(4) “Best value contractor” means a properly licensed person, firm, or corporation that submits a bid for, or is awarded, a best value contract.

(5) “District” means the Santa Clara Valley Water District.

(6) “Project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(7) “Settlement agreement” means the agreement entitled “Settlement Agreement Regarding Water Rights of the Santa Clara Valley Water District on Coyote, Guadalupe, and Stevens Creeks” initialed on May 27, 2003, by the district, the United States Department of the Interior, United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the United States Department of Commerce, National Marine Fisheries Service, the California Department of Fish and Game, the Guadalupe-Coyote Resource Conservation District, Trout Unlimited, the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen’s Associations, and California Trout, Incorporated.

(b) Upon the approval of the board, the district may award contracts on a best value basis for any work for the Anderson Dam project.

(c) If the board elects to award a contract on a best value basis pursuant to the authorization in subdivision (b), the district shall comply with all of the following:

(1) The district shall prepare a set of documents setting forth the scope and estimated price of the project. The documents may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or layouts, or any other information deemed necessary to adequately describe the district’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in California.

(2) The district shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to prequalify or short-list the entities, including subcontractors and suppliers, whose bids shall be evaluated for final selection. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, all of the following elements:

(A) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the district to evaluate bids, the procedure for final selection of the bidder, and any other information deemed necessary by the district to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(B) Significant factors that the district reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design-related expertise, construction expertise,
 acceptable safety records, and all other non-price-related factors.

(C) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the district. In preparing the standard template, the district may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other local agencies with experience awarding a contract on a best value basis. The template shall require all of the following information:

(i) If the bidder is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, composed of privately held entities, a listing of all of the shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(ii) Evidence that the members of the contracting team have completed, or demonstrated
 the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the bidder has the capacity to complete the project.

(iii) The licenses, registration, and credentials required for the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(iv) Evidence that establishes that the bidder has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(v) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(vi) An acceptable safety record. “Safety record” means the prior history concerning the safe performance of construction contracts. The criteria used to evaluate a bidder’s safety record shall include, at a minimum, its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period.

(vii) The information required under this subparagraph shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the bidder and its general partners or joint venture members.

(3) Bids shall be evaluated by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the procurement process documents, including the request for qualifications, as specified in paragraphs (1) and (2), and the price.

(d) (1) An Anderson Dam project contractor shall not be prequalified, shortlisted, or awarded a contract, regardless of whether the best value process is used, unless the contractor provides an enforceable commitment to the district that the contractor and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply if either of the following requirements are met:

(A) The district has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained
 workforce, and the contractor agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The contractor has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the contractor and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 48, Sec. 2.   (AB 271)   Effective January 1, 2022.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 84. Napa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21170. - 21171.]

21170.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Napa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1449 of the Statutes of 1951.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21171.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the whole of the work, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the
 improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit for the whole thereof or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract as a unit or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid.

(b) In the event all proposals
 are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvements, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible
 bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 67.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 85. Lake County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21180. - 21182.]

21180.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Lake County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1544 of the Statutes of 1951.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21181.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call in the district pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be
 divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000), or the work consists of channel protection,
 maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by the combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may acquire in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 68.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21182.

In case of an emergency, the board of supervisors shall respond to the emergency pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050) if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given.

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, first Sec. 65 (following Sec. 37).   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 86. Contra Costa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21190. - 21191.]

21190.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Contra Costa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1617 of the Statutes of 1951.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21191.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 3247) of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that chapter. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may acquire in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, first Sec. 66 (preceding Sec. 39).   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 86.5. Solano County Water Agency [21195. - 21196.]

21195.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Solano County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 573 of the Statutes of 1989.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1993, Ch. 906, Sec. 14.4.   Effective October 8, 1993.   Operative January 1, 1994, by Sec. 24 of Ch. 906.)
-------------------------------------------

21196.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of directors of the district shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract is made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the
 board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), or the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open
 market, without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(c) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of the Solano County Flood Control and Water Conservation District Act, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 69.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 87. Yolo County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21200. - 21204.]

21200.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Yolo County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1657 of the Statutes of 1951.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21201.

All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided, estimated to cost in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner as provided.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 12.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

21202.

The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made therefor, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material in connection therewith. The board may reject any and all bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21203.

If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or where the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 40.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

21204.

The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3 of this act, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district or zone.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 88. Sacramento County Water Agency [21210. - 21212.]

21210.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Sacramento County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 10 of the Statutes of the 1952 First Extraordinary Session.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21211.

The agency shall have the power to make contracts, employ labor and to do all acts necessary for the full exercise of its purposes and powers. The board of directors of the agency may cause construction or other work to be performed or carried out by contracts or by the agency under its own superintendents as hereinafter provided.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21212.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of directors of the agency shall advertise pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in a newspaper of general circulation published in the agency’s jurisdiction inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract is made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and
 upon the payment of any claims for labor and material and containing the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000), or the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without
 advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 6 of Chapter 10 of the Statutes of the 1952 First Extraordinary Session, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the agency.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 70.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 89. Vallejo Flood and Wastewater District [21220. - 21221.]

21220.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Vallejo Flood and Wastewater District, as provided for in Chapter 17 of the Statutes of the 1952 First Extraordinary Session.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 387, Sec. 15.   (SB 205)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

21221.

In all work of improvement or repair of any of the works or property of the district and in the furnishing of materials or supplies therefor, when the expenditures exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000), the work shall be done by contract, and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, after notice by publication in the district pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code and by posting the notice for at least five days at or near the door of the meeting place
 of the board of trustees prior to the date set for opening bids; the notices shall distinctly state the work contemplated or the materials or supplies required therefor; provided the board of trustees may reject any bid presented and readvertise and post in their discretion, and provided further, that the board may declare and determine that in its opinion the work in question can be performed more economically by day labor or the materials or supplies can be furnished at a lower price in the open market, and they may proceed to have the work done or the materials purchased without further observance of the provisions of this section.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2025, Ch. 242, Sec. 13.   (SB 858)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 90. Marin County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21230. - 21231.]

21230.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Marin County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 666 of the Statutes of 1953.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21231.

Any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be done by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract will be let as a single unit, or will be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into separate specific
 parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the
 work done by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may acquire in the open market without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in the preceding sentence, may not be purchased if the cost exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 71.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 91. Contra Costa County Storm Drainage District [21240. - 21241.]

21240.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Contra Costa County Storm Drainage District, as provided for in Chapter 1532 of the Statutes of 1953.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21241.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the zone. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable
 specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or the work consists of emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by day labor, under
 the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The board may acquire in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in the preceding sentence, may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 72.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 92. San Benito County Water Conservation and Flood Control District [21250. - 21251.]

21250.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Benito County Water Conservation and Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 1598 of the Statutes of 1953.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21251.

(a) (1) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, if the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or divided into severable parts, or both.

(2) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, if the cost according to the estimate of the engineer is thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) or less, may be let without advertising for bids in accordance with procedures adopted by the board.

(b) The board shall call for bids and advertise the call pursuant to Section 6063 of the Government Code in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as one unit or divided into severable specific parts.

(c) The work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, or both, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid.

(d) If all proposals are
 rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(e) The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 73.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 93. Del Norte County Flood Control District [21260. - 21261.]

21260.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Del Norte County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 166 of the Statutes of 1955.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21261.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit for the work, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided
 into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of
 supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 74.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 94. Santa Barbara County Flood Control and Water Conservation Districts [21270. - 21271.]

21270.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Barbara County Flood Control and Water Conservation Districts, as provided for in Chapter 1057 of the Statutes of 1955.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21271.

All improvement and units of work to be performed by or for the district shall be performed in accordance with the following procedures and requirements:

(a) If the work consists of the protection or maintenance of channels, storm drains, dams or other flood control works, or emergency work, the board of directors may, without advertising for bids therefor, have the work done by day labor under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(b) If the work consists
 of the construction of new flood control channels, storm drains, dams, or other unit or units of work, and if the cost of the work, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), and if the work is not the type of work referred to in subdivision (a) or (c) of this section, the new construction shall be performed under a contract or contracts which shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in subdivision (d) of this section.

(c) If the work consists of the maintenance or alteration of existing facilities, including electrical, painting, and roofing work, and if the cost of labor and materials for the work according to the engineer’s estimate, will exceed three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500), and if the work is not the type of work referred to in subdivision (a) or (b) of this section, the maintenance and alteration work shall be performed under a contract or
 contracts which shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in subdivision (d) of this section.

(d) The board shall first determine whether the work shall be let as a single unit or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable, specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the
 board good and sufficient bond to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material. The faithful performance bond shall contain the terms and conditions as the board may specify, and the payment bond shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in, and shall be subject to, the provisions of Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. If the work to be performed on behalf of the district does not involve an expenditure of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) or more, the district may require a faithful performance bond or a payment bond. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid.

(e) If no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or if the estimated cost of work of the type referred to in subdivision (b) of this section does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or if the estimated cost of
 work of the type referred to in subdivision (c) of this section does not exceed three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500), the board of directors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by combination of the two. If any change or alteration in a contract awarded under the provisions of this section for work of the type referred to in subdivision (b) or (c) is deemed necessary and the cost does not exceed 10 percent of the original contract price, the board may authorize the contractor to proceed with the change or alteration without the formality of obtaining bids.

(f) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the district shall have the power to acquire in the open market, and may authorize the Purchasing Agents of the County of Santa Barbara to acquire in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for
 any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (a) of this section, may not be purchased without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), unless the purchase is made by the county purchasing agent at the request of the district, in which case the cost shall not exceed six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500).

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 75.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 95. Santa Cruz County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21280. - 21297.]

21280.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Cruz County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1489 of the Statutes of 1955.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21281.

All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in Sections 21292 and 21298, estimated to cost in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner hereinafter provided.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21282.

Materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, may not be purchased if the cost thereof exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract therefor to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21283.

The board shall adopt plans, specifications, strain sheets, and working details for the work.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21284.

The board shall cause an advertisement for bids for the performance of the work on the purchase of materials to be published in the county pursuant to Section 6061 of the Government Code, at least 10 days before the day set for opening bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21285.

All bidders shall be afforded opportunity to examine the plans, specifications, strain sheets and working details.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21286.

All proposals or bids offered shall be accompanied by a cashier’s or certified check payable to the district, for an amount which shall not be less than 10 percent of the aggregate of the proposal, or by a bond for that amount and so payable, signed by the bidder and two sureties, who shall justify, in double that amount, before any officer competent to administer an oath, and over and above all statutory exemptions, or by a corporate surety bond, to the satisfaction and approval of the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21287.

The board shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder, and the person to whom the contract is awarded shall perform the work in accordance with the plans, specifications, strain sheets, and working details, unless the contract is modified by a four-fifths vote of the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21288.

The person to whom the contract is awarded shall execute a bond to be approved by the board for the faithful performance of the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21289.

If the board is advised by its engineer, or by the county surveyor or engineer, that any facility can be constructed or repaired for a sum less than the lowest responsible bid, it may reject all bids and order the work done by day’s work under the supervision and direction of the county surveyor or engineer or its engineer as determined by the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21290.

(a) By the unanimous consent of the whole board in cases of emergency, except for compliance with subdivision (b), the board may proceed at once to replace or repair any and all structures without adopting the plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. If the work is done wholly or in part by contract, the contractor shall be paid the actual cost of material and labor expended by him or her in doing the work, plus not more than 15 percent to cover all profits, supervisions, use of machinery and tools, and other expenses. No more than the lowest current market prices shall be paid for materials.

(b) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 49.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

21291.

The plans and specifications adopted by the board for the erection, alteration, construction, or repair of any public building or other public structure shall not be altered or changed in any manner which increases its cost, except by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21292.

Whenever the board enters into a contract for the erection, construction, alteration, or repair of any public building or other structure, the contract shall not be altered or changed in any manner, except by order adopted by a vote of two-thirds of the board, and the consent of the contractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21293.

If any change or alteration of the contract is ordered, it shall be specified in writing and the cost agreed upon between the board and the contractor. If the cost so agreed upon:

(a) Does not exceed the amount specified in Section 113, or

(b) Does not exceed 10 percent of the original contract price,
the board may authorize the contractor to proceed with the change or alteration without the formality of obtaining bids therefor.

No change or alteration shall be authorized the amount of which is within the limitation specified in subdivision (b) and in excess of the limitation specified in subdivision (a) except by four-fifths vote of the board.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21294.

If the cost of the works is reduced by reason of any modification of the contract an adjustment shall be made with the district therefor.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21295.

Personal property may be purchased in the manner provided therefor for the county.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21296.

The provisions of this article do not apply to work to be performed by others pursuant to Section 21297.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21297.

(a) It may make and enter into contracts with the United States, the State of California, any political subdivision, county, municipality, district, agency, or mandatory of the State of California or of the United States and any department, board, bureau, or commission of the State of California or the United States, or any person, firm, association, or corporation, jointly or severally, for the acquisition of property or rights or the construction, maintenance, and operation in whole or in part of any or all works and improvements provided for in this act.

(b) It may lease or rent to or from any of the parties named in subdivision (a) any property or rights necessary, in the opinion of the board, to accomplish or carry out any of the work or improvement or the maintenance thereof herein provided and under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the parties.

(c) It may receive and accept any and all contributions in labor, material, or money from any of the parties named in subdivision (a), to be applied to the work or improvement herein provided for.

(d) It may cooperate and contract with the United States under the Federal Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902, and all acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto or any other act of Congress heretofore or hereafter enacted permitting cooperation or contract for the purposes of construction of works, whether for irrigation, drainage, or flood control, or for the acquisition, purchase, extension, operation, or maintenance of such works, or for a water supply for any purposes, or for the assumption as principal or guarantor of indebtedness to the United States, or for carrying out any of the purposes of the district, and to carry out and perform the terms of any contract so made.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 96. San Joaquin County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21310. - 21311.]

21310.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Joaquin County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 46 of the Statutes of 1956.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21311.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any
 contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract for the whole as a unit or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement,
 or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of the two. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may acquire in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), shall not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible
 bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 76.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 97. Placer County Water Agency [21320. - 21322.]

21320.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Placer County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1234 of the Statutes of 1957.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21321.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency’s jurisdiction, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided
 into parts. The work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call.

The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code.

(b) The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5
 (commencing with Section 22050). In the event that no proposals are received, or if only one responsive proposal is received, the board may negotiate a contract for construction or performance of the work or improvement or substantially similar work or improvement. However, if only one responsive proposal is received, the contract must be negotiated with the bidder.

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(d) Sections 4300 to 4305, inclusive, of the Government Code do not apply to the agency’s Middle Fork American River Project.

(e) This section applies to all proposals or contracts whether or not received or entered into prior to the effective date of the amendment of this provision made at the
 1963 Regular Session of the Legislature.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 77.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21322.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 21321, contracts may be let for work without advertising in cases of significant emergency as determined by the board. Cases of significant emergency include, but are not limited to:

(1) States of emergency as specified in Section 8558 of the Government Code.

(2) When emergency repair or replacement is necessary to permit the continued operation or service of the agency.

(3) When the emergency work is necessary to avoid danger to life or property.

Any action taken under this section must be authorized by a unanimous vote of the board members present. Additionally, the board must find, based on substantial evidence set forth in the minutes of its meeting, that the emergency work is necessary for the stated reasons.

(History: Added by Stats. 1993, Ch. 687, Sec. 1.   Effective October 4, 1993.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 98. Tehama County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21330. - 21331.]

21330.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Tehama County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 1280 of the Statutes of 1957.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21331.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of
 the contract and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or where the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase
 in the open market, without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3 of Chapter 1280 of the Statutes of 1957, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 78.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 99. Shasta County Water Agency [21340. - 21341.]

21340.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Shasta County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1512 of the Statutes of 1957.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21341.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published by the agency inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract is made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and
 material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids. In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or where the work consists of emergency work, the board, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The agency may purchase in the open market, without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(b) The
 provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 59 of Chapter 1512 of the Statutes of 1957, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the agency.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 79.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 100. Yuba County Water Agency [21350. - 21351.]

21350.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Yuba County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 788 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21351.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published by the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under a
 single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The board may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any
 work, either under contract or by force account. In awarding any contract or authorizing any work, the board shall comply with the provisions of Article 2 (commencing with Section 1770) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 80.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 101. Mariposa County Water Agency [21360. - 21361.]

21360.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Mariposa County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2036 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21361.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency’s jurisdiction, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be
 let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials
 and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 81.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 102. Sutter County Water Agency [21370. - 21371.]

21370.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Sutter County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2088 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21371.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency’s jurisdiction, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be
 let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract
 or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 82.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 103. San Mateo County Flood Control District [21380. - 21381.]

21380.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Mateo County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 2108 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21381.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of supervisors of the district shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the improvement or work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of said work or improvement. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon
 the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that part. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force
 account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 83.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 104. Plumas County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21390. - 21391.]

21390.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Plumas County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 2114 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21391.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract
 and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any and all bids, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement therefor, where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or where the work consists of emergency work necessary in order to protect life and property, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the open market without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3 of Chapter 2114 of the Statutes of 1959, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 84.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 105. Siskiyou County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21400. - 21401.]

21400.

The provisons of this article shall apply to contracts by the Siskiyou County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 2121 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21401.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and
 upon the payment of all claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bids, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or where work consists of emergency work, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the open market
 without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3 of Chapter 2121 of the Statutes of 1959, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 85.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 106. Nevada County Water Agency [21410. - 21411.]

21410.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Nevada County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2122 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21411.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency’s jurisdiction, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be
 let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). In that event a majority vote of all board members shall be required. The board may purchase in the
 open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 86.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 107. Sierra County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21420. - 21421.]

21420.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Sierra County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 2123 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21421.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract
 and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), or where the work consists of emergency work, the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the open
 market without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3 of Chapter 2123 of the Statutes of 1959, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 87.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 108. Lassen-Modoc County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21430. - 21431.]

21430.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Lassen-Modoc County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 2127 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21431.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract
 and upon the payment of all claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any bid, in which case the board may advertise for new bids.

(b) In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000), the board of directors, by unanimous vote of all members present, may without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may purchase in the open market without advertisement for bids, materials
 and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States under the authority of Section 3 of Chapter 2127 of the Statutes of 1959, or to a contract authorized by a vote of the electorate of the district.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 88.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 109. Yuba-Bear River Basin Authority [21440. - 21441.]

21440.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Yuba-Bear River Basin Authority, as provided for in Chapter 2131 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21441.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the authority, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The
 work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids.

(b) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The authority may
 purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials, and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 89.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 110. Amador County Water Agency [21450. - 21451.]

21450.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Amador County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2137 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21451.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be
 let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The payment bonds shall comply with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids,
 materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 90.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 111. El Dorado County Water Agency [21460. - 21461.]

21460.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the El Dorado County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2139 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21461.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under a
 single contract or several contracts, as stated in such call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any and all bids. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and
 supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 91.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 112. Mojave Water Agency [21470. - 21472.]

21470.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Mojave Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2146 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21471.

Subject to the limitations in Section 14 of Chapter 166 of the Statutes of 1967, the agency may join with one or more public agencies, private corporations, or other persons for the purpose of carrying out any of the powers of the agency, and for that purpose to contract with the other public agencies, private corporations, or persons for the purpose of financing the acquisitions, constructions, and operations. The contract may provide for contributions to be made by each party to the contract, the division and apportionment of the expenses of acquisitions and operations, and the division and apportionment of the benefits and the services and products therefrom, may provide for any agency to effect the acquisitions and to carry on those operations, and shall provide, in the powers and methods of procedure for the agency, the method by which the agency may contract. The contracts with other public agencies, private corporations, or persons may contain any other and further covenants and agreements that may be necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes of the contracts. As used in this section, “public agency” shall be deemed to mean and include the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State of California or any department or agency thereof, or a county, city, public corporation, or other public district of this state. As used in this section, “private corporation” shall be deemed to mean and include any private corporation organized under the laws of the United States or of this or any other state. Contracts mentioned in this section include those made with the United States, under the Federal Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902, and all acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any other act of Congress heretofore or hereafter enacted permitting cooperation. Any such contract with the United States or any department or agency thereof, or with any private corporation organized under the laws of the United States, by which the Mojave Water Agency, or any improvement district thereof, incurs an indebtedness or liability exceeding in any year the income and revenue for that year shall not be executed without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the agency, or an improvement district thereof, voting at a special election to be held for that purpose. The special election shall be called and held, so far as practicable, in the same manner as bond elections for the agency. The exact form of the contract need not be available at the time of the special election, but all of the following shall be known and included in the proposition or measure submitted to the qualified electors of the agency, or an improvement district thereof, at the special election:

(a) Purpose of the contract.

(b) Maximum amount of the indebtedness created by the contract.

(c) Maximum term of repayment.

(d) Maximum interest rate on the indebtedness created by the contract.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2006, Ch. 538, Sec. 558.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

21472.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the agency shall respond to the emergency pursuant to Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, second Sec. 65.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 113. Antelope Valley-East Kern Water Agency [21480. - 21482.]

21480.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Antelope Valley-East Kern Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 2146 of the Statutes of 1959.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21481.

The Antelope Valley-East Kern Water Agency shall have the power to join with one or more public agencies, private corporations, or other persons for the purpose of carrying out any of the powers of the agency, and for that purpose to contract with such other public agencies or private corporations or persons for the purpose of financing such acquisitions, constructions, and operations. Such contracts may provide for contributions to be made by each party thereto and for the division and apportionment of the expenses of such acquisitions and operations, and the division and apportionment of the benefits, the services and products therefrom, and may provide for any agency to effect such acquisitions and to carry on such operations, and shall provide in the powers and methods of procedure for such agency the method by which such agency may contract. Such contracts with other public agencies or private corporations or persons may contain such other and further covenants and agreements as may be necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes thereof. The term “public agency,” as used in this paragraph, shall be deemed to mean and include the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State of California or any department or agency thereof, a county, city, public corporation, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, or public district of this state. The term “private corporation,” as used in this paragraph, shall be deemed to mean and include any private corporation organized under the laws of the United States or of this or any other state thereof. Contracts mentioned herein include those made with the United States, under the Federal Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902, and all acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto or any other act of Congress heretofore or hereafter enacted permitting cooperation. Any such contract with the United States or any department or agency thereof, or with any private corporation organized under the laws of the United States, by which the Antelope Valley-East Kern Water Agency incurs an indebtedness or liability exceeding in any year the income and revenue for such year shall not be executed without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the agency voting at a special election to be held for that purpose, such election to be called and held, so far as practicable, in the same manner as bond elections for the agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21482.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the agency shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, second Sec. 66.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 114. Kern County Water Agency [21490. - 21492.]

21490.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Kern County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1003 of the Statutes of 1961.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21491.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The
 work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in such call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid.

(b) In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 92.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21492.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 68.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 115. Desert Water Agency [21500. - 21501.]

21500.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Desert Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1069 of the Statutes of 1961.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21501.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts.
 The work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in such call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 9550) of Title 3 of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any and all bids.

(b) The board may have work done by force account without advertising for bids or by informal bidding procedures in any of the following situations:

(1) All proposals are rejected.

(2) No proposals are received.

(3) The estimated cost of the work does not exceed
 fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) until January 1, 1989. After January 1, 1989, the estimated cost of the work shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000).

(4) The work consists of channel protection.

(5) The work consists of maintenance work, except that informal bidding procedures may be used only where the estimated cost does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

(6) The work consists of emergency work. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account, except that,
 materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased, if the cost exceeds fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) As used in this section, “informal bidding procedures” means that the board shall, at a minimum, award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder after publishing a notice which generally describes the work to be performed and invites written bids in a newspaper of general circulation in the agency once a week for two successive weeks. The board shall obtain a minimum of three written bids.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 93.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 116. San Gorgonio Pass Water Agency [21510. - 21511.]

21510.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Gorgonio Pass Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1435 of the Statutes of 1961.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21511.

(a) All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The
 work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any and all bids.

(b) In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account. However, materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased, if the cost exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 94.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 117. Alpine County Water Agency [21520. - 21521.]

21520.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Alpine County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1896 of the Statutes of 1961.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21521.

All contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under a
 single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid. In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). In that event a majority vote of all board members shall be required. The board may purchase in the open market
 without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 95.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 118. Castaic Lake Water Agency [21530. - 21531.]

21530.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 833, Sec. 2.   (SB 634)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------

21531.

(a) The Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency shall have power to prescribe methods for the construction of works and for the letting of contracts for the construction of works, structures, or equipment, or the performance or furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies, necessary or convenient for carrying out any of the purposes of this act or for the acquisition or disposal of any real or personal property; provided, that all contracts for any improvement or unit of work, when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed thirty thousand dollars
 ($30,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation published in the agency or by two insertions in a nondaily newspaper of general circulation published in the agency or, if no newspaper is published in the agency, in any newspaper of general circulation distributed in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to
 file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid.

(b) In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed
 thirty thousand dollars ($30,000),
 or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds thirty
 thousand dollars ($30,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2017, Ch. 833, Sec. 3.   (SB 634)   Effective January 1, 2018.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 119. Crestline-Lake Arrowhead Water Agency [21540. - 21541.]

21540.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Crestline-Lake Arrowhead Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 40 of the Statutes of the 1962 First Extraordinary Session.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21541.

(a) The Crestline-Lake Arrowhead Water Agency shall have power to prescribe methods for the construction of works and for the letting of contracts for the construction of works, structures, or equipment, or the performance or furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies, necessary or convenient for carrying out any of the purposes of this act or for the acquisition or disposal of any real or personal property. However, all contracts for the construction of any improvement or unit of work, when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as
 a single unit or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call.

The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any bid.

(b) In the event all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account. However, materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible
 bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 97.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 120. San Diego County Flood Control District [21550. - 21552.]

21550.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the San Diego County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 55 of the Statutes of the 1966 First Extraordinary Session.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21551.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work estimated to cost over ten thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with Article 3.5 (commencing with Section 20120) of Chapter 1.5. If cost of the project or service will not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), the district may have the work done by force account. The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bid, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account. 

(b) The board of directors may, by ordinance, resolution, or board order, authorize the county engineer or other county officer to order changes or additions in work being performed under construction contract. When so authorized, any change or addition in the work shall be ordered in writing by the county engineer, or other designated officer, and the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) when the total amount of the original contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), nor 10 percent of the amount of any original contract that exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), but does not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). 

(c) For contracts whose original cost exceeds two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), the extra cost for any change or addition to the work so ordered shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), plus 5 percent of the amount of the original contract costs in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). In no event shall any such change or alteration exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000).

(History: Amended by Stats. 1997, Ch. 215, Sec. 4.   Effective January 1, 1998.)
-------------------------------------------

21552.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the district shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 74.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 121. Metropolitan Water District [21560. - 21567.]

21560.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by a Metropolitan Water District, as provided for in Chapter 209 of the Statutes of 1969.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21561.

As used in this article, “public corporation” means and includes the United States or any other public agency thereof or this or any other state or any political district or subdivision thereof.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21562.

A district may join with one or more other public or private corporations (within or without this state) for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers, and for that purpose may contract with any such other public or private corporation to finance acquisitions, constructions, and operations.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21563.

Any contract with any other public or private corporation pursuant to Section 21562 may provide for contributions to be made by each party and for the division and apportionment of the expenses of such acquisitions and operations, and the division and apportionment of the benefits, services, and products from the contract. Any such contract may provide for an agency to effect such acquisitions and carry on such operations, and shall provide in the powers and methods of procedure for such agency the method by which such agency may contract. Any such contract may contain such other and further covenants and agreements as may be necessary and convenient to accomplish such purposes.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21564.

The board may prescribe methods for the construction of works and for the letting of contracts for the construction of works, structures, or equipment, or for the performance or furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies required for the carrying out of any of the purposes of this act.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21565.

Except as otherwise provided in Article 121.1 (commencing with Section 21568) of this chapter, whenever any work is not to be done by the district itself by force account, and the amount involved shall be twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or more, the board shall provide for the letting of contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, after publication of notices inviting bids, but subject to the right of the board to reject any and all proposals.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 1.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21566.

The board, in advertising for bids and in letting contracts as provided in Section 21565, may require that all articles furnished to the district pursuant to such contracts be manufactured, produced, or fabricated in the United States or its territories, and may prohibit the use in, or employment in connection with, the carrying out of such contracts by the contractor or any subcontractor, of all machinery or materials except those which have been manufactured, produced, or fabricated in the United States or its territories, if they are determined by the board to be available.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21567.

(a) Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 21566, contracts, in writing or otherwise, may be let without advertising for, or inviting bids, when any repairs, alterations, or other work, or the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, or other property is deemed by the board to be for an emergency.

(b) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 76.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 121.1. Metropolitan Water District of Southern California-Alternative Project Delivery Program [21568. - 21568.11.]

21568.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that severe drought conditions and climate change have negatively impacted the imported water supplies of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, necessitating an increase in local water supplies, including recycled water, and the construction of water infrastructure to more efficiently transport limited water supplies within the district’s service area.

(b) The
 Legislature further finds and declares that alternative project delivery, using the best value procurement methodology, has been authorized for various agencies that have reported benefits from those projects not achievable through the traditional design-bid-build method, including reduced project costs and expedited project start and completion.

(c) This article provides for a range of procurement methods for district projects, including a planned regional recycled water project, designed to counteract the negative impacts of severe and ongoing drought and the continuing impacts of climate change on water supplies in southern California.

(d) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this article to authorize the district to utilize the methods specified herein as cost-effective options for accelerating the construction of drought-resilient water infrastructure
 projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.1.

(a) Upon approval by its governing body, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California may use, in addition to other methods of project delivery otherwise allowable by law, the following methods of project delivery for a regional recycled water project or other water infrastructure project undertaken by the district to alleviate water supply shortages attributable to drought or climate change:

(1) Design-build.

(2) Progressive design-build.

(3) Construction Manager/General Contractor method.

(b) (1) A design-build contract shall be awarded pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 22160).

(2) A progressive design-build contract or a Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract shall be awarded on a best value or qualifications basis or to the lowest responsible bidder.

(c) The authority under this article shall apply to no more than 15 capital outlay projects.

(d) The district shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy,
 consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the district relating to the solicitation of a design-build or progressive design-build project to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.2.

As used in this article:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that relate to price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the district and meeting the objectives of the project.

(b) “Construction
 manager” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is a licensed contractor pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting and engineering services as needed pursuant to a Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract.

(c) “Construction Manager/General Contractor method” means a project delivery method in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and construction services during the construction phase of the project. The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the contract for preconstruction services or at a later time. The execution of the design and the construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(d) “Design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity.

(e) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(f) “District” means the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California.

(g) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the district and the design-build entity or the Construction Manager/General Contractor for the design-build entity or the Construction Manager/General Contractor to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities
 sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(h) “Preconstruction services” means advice during the design phase, including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the district to design a more constructible project.

(i) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single design-build entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project.

(j) “Project” means a public work necessary for the construction of a recycled water facility or infrastructure designed specifically to alleviate water shortages attributable to drought, climate change, or other environmental factors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.3.

(a) The district shall follow the design-build procedure described in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 22160) to award a design-build contract pursuant to this article.

(b) For purposes of this section, all references in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 22160) to “county” and “local agency” shall mean the district, as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 21568.2.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.4.

The procurement process for progressive design-build projects shall proceed as follows:

(a) The district shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to select a design-build entity to execute the project. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Documentation of the size, type, and desired design
 character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the district’s needs, including the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the district to evaluate the design-build entity’s qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the district to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the district reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other non-price-related factors. The district may require that a preliminary cost estimate, including the basis for the estimate, be included in the design-build entities’ responses and may consider those costs in evaluation of the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or
 the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A request for statements of qualifications with a template for the statement that is prepared by the district. The district shall require all of the following information in the statement and indicate, in the template, that the following information is required:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the entity’s shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of the statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar
 size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(5) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of
 perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(b) At the close of the solicitation period, the district shall review the submissions. The district may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. The district may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the project.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the district shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the district’s contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(d) After selecting a design-build entity based on qualifications, the district may enter into a contract and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a guaranteed maximum price for the project.

(e) (1) Upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the project, the district, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract with the design-build entity to contract for the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project, and will amend the contract to be consistent with the guaranteed maximum price. In the event that there are unforeseen site conditions or changes initiated at the request of the district, the guaranteed maximum price shall be modified if necessary.

(2) If the costs for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project exceed the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the costs for these activities are less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the costs and the guaranteed maximum price, unless there is a prior written agreement concerning sharing of these proceeds. For purposes of this section, cost shall include the design-build entity’s direct costs, general conditions, overhead, and fee. 

(f) If the district and the design-build entity do not reach agreement on a guaranteed maximum price, or the district otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract to complete the remaining work, the district may solicit proposals to
 complete the project from other firms that submitted statements of qualifications or requests for proposals. The district may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the district to do so, formally solicit proposals from other design-build entities. 

(g) (1) The district, in each design-build request for qualifications, may identify specific types of subcontractors that shall be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(2) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications, the design-build entity shall proceed as listed in this subdivision in awarding
 construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work.

(A) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the district, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(B) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(C) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(3) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with
 Section 4100) of Part 1. 

(4) A construction subcontractor licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code that provides design services used on a project authorized by this section shall not be subject to any liability arising from their design if the construction subcontract for that design is not performed by that subcontractor.

(5) If the district and the design-build entity do not reach agreement on a guaranteed maximum price, or the district otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract to complete the remaining work, and the district elects to contract with a new design-build entity to complete the remaining work, the design professionals responsible for performing design services on behalf of the design-build entity shall have sole liability for their design errors and omissions. 

(h) (1) The district shall submit to the relevant committees of the Legislature, on or before January 1, 2027, a report containing a description of each public works project procured by the district through the progressive design-build process described in this article that is completed after January 1, 2023, and before December 1, 2026.

(2) The report shall include, but is not limited to, all of the following information:

(A) A description of the project and the design-build entity that was awarded the contract for the project.

(B) The initial estimated, actual final project costs, and guaranteed maximum price.

(C) An assessment of the selection process and criteria
 required by this article.

(D) An assessment of the effects of the progressive design-build process described in this article on cost and schedule for the project.

(E) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that provided construction services, but did not meet the target price for their scope of work.

(F) Whether or not any portion of a design prepared by the specialty subcontractor that did not perform the construction work for that design was used by the district.

(G) In instances where the district determined that the guaranteed maximum price of any subcontract exceeded the anticipated target price for that portion of the project, which subcontracts were impacted and on what basis the district
 determined what the anticipated target price was.

(H) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a small business under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(I) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a microbusiness under paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(3) The report shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code and may be combined with the report required pursuant to Section 21568.5.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.5.

The procurement process for Construction Manager/General Contractor method projects shall proceed as follows:

(a) (1) The district shall establish a procedure for the evaluation and selection of a construction manager through a request for qualifications (RFQ). The RFQ shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(A) If the construction manager
 is a partnership, limited partnership, or other association, a list of all the partners, general partners, or association members known at the time of the statement of qualifications submission who will participate in the Construction Manager/General Contractor method contract.

(B) Evidence that the members of the construction manager have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete construction of the project, as well as a financial statement that assures the district that the construction manager has the capacity to complete the project, construction expertise, and an acceptable safety record.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to construct the project,
 including information on the revocation or suspension of any license, registration, or credential.

(D) Evidence that establishes the construction manager has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Any prior serious or willful violation of the California Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1973 (Part 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of the Labor Code), or the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-596), settled against any member of the construction manager, and information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and worker safety program.

(F) Information concerning any debarment, disqualification, or removal from a federal, state, or local government public works project. Any instance in
 which a construction manager, its owners, officers, or managing employees submitted a bid on a public works project and were found to be nonresponsive or were found by an awarding body not to be a responsible bidder.

(G) Any instance in which the construction manager, or its owners, officers, or managing employees, defaulted on a construction contract. 

(H) Any violations of the Contractors State License Law (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), excluding alleged violations of federal or state law including the payment of wages, benefits, apprenticeship requirements, or personal income tax withholding, or of the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (26 U.S.C. Sec. 3101 et seq.) withholding requirements settled against any member of the construction manager. 

(I) Information concerning the bankruptcy or receivership of any member of the construction manager, including information concerning any work completed by a surety.

(J) Information concerning all settled adverse claims, disputes, or lawsuits between the owner of a public works project and any member of the construction manager during the five years preceding submission of a bid pursuant to this section, in which the claim, settlement, or judgment exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Information shall also be provided concerning any work completed by a surety during this period.

(K) In the case of partnership or other association that is not a legal entity, a copy of the agreement creating the partnership or association and specifying that all partners or association members agree to be fully liable for the performance under the contract. 

(L) For the purpose of this paragraph, a construction manager’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if their experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and their average total recordable injury/illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical requirements for its business category.

(2) The information required pursuant to this subdivision shall be verified under oath by the construction manager and its members in the manner in which civil pleadings in civil actions are verified. Information that is not a public record pursuant to the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(b) For each RFQ, the district shall generate a final list of qualified persons or firms that participated in the RFQ prior to entering into negotiations on the contract for which the RFQ applies.

(c) (1) For each contract included in the RFQ, the district shall enter into negotiations for the contract with the highest qualified person or firm on the final list for that contract. However, if the RFQ is for multiple contracts and specifies that all of the multiple contracts will be awarded to a single construction manager, there may be a single negotiation for all the multiple contracts. The negotiations shall include consideration of compensation and other contract terms that the district determines to be fair and reasonable to the district. In making this decision, the district shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity, and the nature of the professional services or construction
 services to be rendered. If the district is not able to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the highest qualified person or firm on the final list regarding compensation and on other contract terms the district determines to be fair and reasonable, the district shall formally terminate negotiations with that person or firm. The district may undertake negotiations with the next most qualified person or firm on the final list in sequence until an agreement is reached or a determination is made to reject all persons or firms on the final list.

(2) If a contract for construction services is entered into pursuant to this section and includes preconstruction services by the construction manager, the district shall enter into a written contract with the construction manager for preconstruction services under which contract the district shall pay the construction manager a fee for preconstruction services in an amount agreed upon by the district and
 the construction manager. The preconstruction services contract may include fees for services to be performed during the contract period, provided, however, that the district shall not request or obtain a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price for the construction contract from the construction manager or enter into a construction contract with the construction manager until after the district has entered into a preconstruction services contract. A preconstruction services contract shall provide for the subsequent negotiation for construction of all or any discrete phase or phases of the project.

(3) A contract for construction services shall be awarded after the plans have been sufficiently developed and either a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price has been successfully negotiated. In the event that a fixed price or a guaranteed maximum price is not negotiated, the district shall not award the contract for construction services.

(4) The district is not required to award the construction services contract.

(5) Construction shall not commence on any phase, package, or element until the district and a construction manager agree in writing on either a fixed price that the district will pay for the construction to be commenced or a guaranteed maximum price for the construction to be commenced and a construction schedule for the project. 

(d) All subcontractors bidding on contracts pursuant to this article shall be afforded the protections contained in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1. The construction manager shall do all of the following:

(1) Provide public notice of the availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements
 applicable to the competitive bidding process of the district.

(2) Provide a fixed date and time on which the subcontracted work will be awarded in accordance with the procedure established pursuant to this article.

(3) Comply with any subcontracting procedures adopted by the district that were included in the district’s RFQ. If the district has adopted procedures to prequalify public works contractors, the construction manager may use the procedures to prequalify subcontractors.

(e) (1) The district shall submit to the relevant committees of the Legislature, on or before January 1, 2027, a report that describes each Construction Manager/General Contractor project approved under this article.

(2) The report shall provide relevant
 data on each project that includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:

(A) The cost of the project.

(B) The state of completion for the project.

(C) The estimated time of completion for the project.

(D) A comprehensive assessment of the effectiveness of the Construction Manager/General Contractor project delivery method relative to project cost and time savings.

(3) The report shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code and may be combined with the report required pursuant to Section 21568.4.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.6.

(a) A design-build entity, construction manager, or construction contractor shall not be awarded a construction contract unless it provides an enforceable commitment to the district that the design-build entity, construction manager, or construction contractor and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in
 accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(b) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following requirements are met:

(1) The district has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the design-build entity, construction manager, or construction contractor agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(2) The design-build entity, construction manager, or construction contractor has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the design-build entity or construction contractor and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(c) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.7.

(a) The district may not award a design-build-operate contract for any project pursuant to this article. A contract may, however, cover operations during a training or transition period.

(b) The district shall perform construction inspection services for all projects authorized and awarded pursuant to this article, and it shall use district employees to the fullest extent possible, and then consultants under contract
 with the district to perform these services.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.8.

Any design-build entity or Construction Manager/General Contractor that is selected to construct a project pursuant to this article shall possess or obtain sufficient bonding to cover the contract amount for construction services and risk and liability insurance the district may require. Any payment or performance bond written for the purposes of this article shall be written using a bond form developed by the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.9.

If the district elects to award a project pursuant to this article, retention proceeds withheld by the district from the design-build entity or Construction Manager/General Contractor shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.10.

Nothing in this article affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------

21568.11.

(a) The provisions of this article pertaining to the progressive design-build and Construction Manager/General Contractor delivery methods shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2028, and as of that date are inoperative. 

(b) The provisions of this article pertaining to design-build shall remain in effect in accordance with Section 22169.

(c) A
 contract awarded pursuant to this article before the applicable portions of the article are inoperative shall continue in full force and effect until completion, including any subsequently executed changes to the contract, or termination.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 275, Sec. 2.   (AB 1845)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 122. Madera County Flood Control and Water Conservation Agency [21570. - 21572.]

21570.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Madera County Flood Control and Water Conservation Agency, as provided for in Chapter 916 of the Statutes of 1969.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21571.

The agency shall have the power to make contracts, employ labor, and do all acts necessary for the full exercise of its purpose and powers. Those contracts determined by the board to be let for bid shall be in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the board for the letting of contracts for such agency. The board may determine to have any work or services performed by contract, or employees of the agency, or in any combination thereof which is economical and expedient for the purpose of the agency.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21572.

Any improvement or unit of work, except as provided in this article, estimated to cost in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be done by contract and let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article. The board of directors of the agency shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract,
 and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material, the bonds to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code, and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any and all bids, and readvertise for new bids, or by a two-thirds vote may elect to undertake the work by force account. In the event no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of such work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), the board of directors by unanimous vote of all members present may without advertising for bids have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The agency may purchase in the open market without advertisement for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force
 account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 98.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 123. Tulare County Flood Control District [21580. - 21581.]

21580.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Tulare County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 1149 of the Statutes of 1969.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21581.

(a) Any improvement or unit of work when the cost according to the estimate of the engineer will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be done by contract and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any
 contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable specific parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract for the whole or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the board conditioned upon the payment of their claims for labor and material, the bond to contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and to be subject to the provisions of that title. The board shall also have the right to reject any and all bids and readvertise for new bids, or by a two-thirds vote may elect to undertake the work by force account.

(b) In the event
 no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by employees of the district, by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by any combination of those methods. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may acquire in the open market without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000),
 without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 99.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 124. Bighorn Mountains Water Agency [21590. - 21591.]

21590.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Bighorn Mountains Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1175 of the Statutes of 1969.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21591.

(a) Any improvement or unit of work, when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), shall be done by contract and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the agency, if there is a newspaper printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall
 state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise, or by a two-thirds vote may elect to undertake work by force account.

(b) If no proposals are received, or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if
 notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The agency may purchase in the open market without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), without advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 100.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 125. Tuolumne County Water Agency [21600. - 21601.]

21600.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Tuolumne County Water Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1236 of the Statutes of 1969.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21601.

Any improvement or unit of work, when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), shall be done by contract and let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or divided into severable parts. The board shall advertise for bids by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation, or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the agency, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work. The call for bids shall state whether the work shall be performed in one unit or divided into parts. The work may be let under
 a single contract or several contracts, as stated in the call. The board shall require the successful bidders to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon payment of their claims for labor and material. The bonds shall comply with Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise, or, by a two-thirds vote, may elect to undertake the work by force account. If no proposals are received, the estimated cost of the work does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may have the work done by force account without advertising for bids. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open
 market without advertising for bids, materials, and supplies for use in any work, either under contract or by force account.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 101.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 126. Tahoe-Truckee Sanitation Agency [21610. - 21618.]

21610.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Tahoe-Truckee Sanitation Agency, as provided for in Chapter 1560 of the Statutes of 1971.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21611.

As used in this article:

(a) “Public entity” means and includes the United States, the state and any county, city, public corporation, or public district of the state, and any department, entity, agency, or authority of any thereof.

(b) “Private corporation” means and includes any private corporation organized under the laws of the United States or of any state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21612.

The agency may join with one or more public entities, private corporations, or other persons for the purpose of carrying out any of the powers of the agency, and for that purpose may contract with any such other public entity, private corporation, or person to finance acquisitions, constructions, and operations.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21613.

Any contract with any other public entity, private corporation, or person may provide for contributions to be made by each party thereto, for the division and apportionment of the benefits, services, and products thereof. Any such contract may also provide that the agency will effect any acquisition or carry on any operations, and may contain such other and further covenants and agreements as may be necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes thereof.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21614.

The agency may prescribe methods for construction of works and for the letting of contracts for any of the following purposes:

(a) The construction of works, structures, or equipment;

(b) The performance or furnishing of labor, materials, or supplies necessary or convenient for carrying out any of the purposes of this act; or

(c) The acquisition or disposal of any real or personal property.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21615.

When any agency expenditure exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000), it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21616.

The board may establish the manner of calling for bids and letting contracts, and all contracts shall be entered into upon such terms and in such manner as the board may authorize.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21617.

If no bids are received upon any call for bids, the board may let the contract without further complying with Section 159 of Chapter 1560 of the Statutes of 1971.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21618.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 81.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 127. Monterey Peninsula Water Management District [21620. - 21624.]

21620.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Monterey Peninsula Water Management District, as provided for in Chapter 527 of the Statutes of 1977.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21621.

Any improvement or unit of work, when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), shall be done by contract and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit or shall be divided into severable parts, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by publication pursuant to Section 6061.3 of the Government Code in a newspaper of general circulation published or circulated in the district, inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or is to be divided into parts, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1998, Ch. 142, Sec. 16.   Effective January 1, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

21622.

The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board, good and sufficient bonds, to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of their claims for labor and material in connection therewith. Such contracts shall be subject to the provisions of Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 102.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------

21623.

The board shall also have the right to reject any and all bids and readvertise for new bids, or by a two-thirds vote may elect to undertake such work by force account. When no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement therefor, or when the estimated cost of such work does not exceed the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000), or when the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work necessary in order to protect life and property from impending damage, the board may, without advertising for bids therefor, have such work done by employees of the district by day labor under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination thereof. The district shall have the power to acquire in the open market without advertising for bids therefor, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except work referred to in the preceding sentence, may not be purchased if the cost thereof exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000) without advertising for bids and awarding the contract therefor to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21624.

In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 83.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 128. Merced County Flood Control District [21630. - 21631.]

21630.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Merced County Flood Control District, as provided for in Chapter 1311 of the Statutes of 1982.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21631.

(a) Any improvement or unit of work when the cost, according to the estimate of the engineer, will exceed six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500), shall be done by contract and shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders in the manner provided in this article. The board shall first determine whether the contract shall be let as a single unit, or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall call for bids and advertise the call by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or by two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation printed in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction or performance of the improvement or work
 before any contract is made. The call for bids shall state whether the work is to be performed as a unit or shall be divided into severable parts, or both, as stated in the call. The board may let the work by single contract or it may divide the work into severable parts by separate contracts, as stated in the call, according to the best interests of the district. The board shall require the successful bidder or bidders to file with the board a good and sufficient bond, to be approved by the board, conditioned upon the payment of their claims for labor and material. The bond shall contain the terms and conditions set forth in Title 3 (commencing with Section 9000) of Part 6 of Division 4 of the Civil Code and be subject to the provisions of that title. The board may reject any and all bids and readvertise for new bids, or by a two-thirds vote may elect to undertake the work by force account.

(b) If no proposals are received pursuant to
 advertisement or the estimated cost of the work does not exceed six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500), or the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board of supervisors may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by employees of the district, by day labor, under the direction of the board, by contract, or by a combination of those methods. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(c) The district may acquire in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials, equipment, and supplies for use in any work or for any other purpose; provided, however, that materials and supplies for use in any new construction work or improvement, except that work referred to in subdivision (b), may not be purchased if the cost exceeds six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500), without
 advertising for bids and awarding the contract to the lowest responsible bidder.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 697, Sec. 103.   (SB 189)   Effective January 1, 2011.   Operative July 1, 2012, by Sec. 105 of Ch. 697.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 129. Colusa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District [21640. - 21641.]

21640.

The provisions of this article shall apply to contracts by the Colusa County Flood Control and Water Conservation District, as provided for in Chapter 926 of the Statutes of 1983.

(History: Added by Stats. 1984, Ch. 1128, Sec. 69.)
-------------------------------------------

21641.

(a) All contracts for the construction of any unit of work, except as provided, estimated to cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided in this article.

(b) The board shall advertise by three insertions in a daily newspaper of general circulation or two insertions in a weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the district inviting sealed proposals for the construction of the work before any contract shall be made, and may let by contract separately any part of the work. The board shall require the successful bidder to file with the board good and sufficient bonds to be approved by the board conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract and upon the payment of the claims for labor and material. The board may reject any bid.

(c) If all proposals are rejected or no proposals are received pursuant to advertisement, or where the estimated cost of the work does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or where the work consists of channel protection, maintenance work, or emergency work, the board, by unanimous vote of all members present, may, without advertising for bids, have the work done by force account. In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the board shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050). The district may purchase in the open market, without advertising for bids, materials and supplies for use in any work either under contract or by force account.

(d) The provisions of this section have no application to a contract entered into with the United States or to a contract authorized by a vote of the eligible voters of the district or a zone.

(History: Amended by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 85.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2. Bidding on Public Contracts [22000. - 22045.]



  ARTICLE 1. Legislative Intent and Definitions [22000. - 22003.]

22000.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act.”

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21000 (as added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1054) by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 37.)
-------------------------------------------

22001.

The Legislature finds and declares that there is a statewide need to promote uniformity of the cost accounting standards and bidding procedures on construction work performed or contracted by public entities in the state. This chapter provides for the development of cost accounting standards and an alternative method for the bidding of public works projects by public entities.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21001 (as added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1054) by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 38.)
-------------------------------------------

22001.5.

On or before January 1, 2009, the Controller shall send a notice to all public agencies describing the provisions of this chapter and the benefits of using its provisions. This notice shall also be included in any notification issued by the Controller pursuant to Section 22020.

(History: Added by Stats. 2007, Ch. 144, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2008.)
-------------------------------------------

22002.

(a) “Public agency,” for purposes of this chapter, means a city, county, city and county, including chartered cities and chartered counties, any special district, and any other agency of the state for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries. “Public agency” also includes a nonprofit transit corporation wholly owned by a public agency and formed to carry out the purposes of the public agency.

(b) “Representatives of the construction industry” for purposes of this chapter, means a general contractor, subcontractor, or labor representative with experience in the field of public works construction.

(c) “Public
 project” means any of the following:

(1) Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, installation, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

(2) Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

(3) In the case of a publicly owned electric utility system, “public project” shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher.

(d) “Public project” does not include maintenance work. For purposes of this section, “maintenance work” includes all of the following:

(1) Routine,
 recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes.

(2) Minor repainting.

(3) Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch.

(4) Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems.

(5) Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher.

(e) For purposes of this chapter, “facility” means any plant, building, structure,
 ground facility, utility system, subject to the limitation found in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c), real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 1.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22003.

A public agency which has, by resolution, elected to become subject to the uniform construction cost accounting procedures set forth in Article 2 (commencing with Section 22010), may utilize the bidding procedures set forth in Article 3 (commencing with Section 22030) when contracting for “maintenance work,” as defined in Section 22002, or when contracting for any other work which does not fall within the definition of “public project,” as defined in Section 22002.

(History: Added by Stats. 1989, Ch. 241, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 2. California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission [22010. - 22020.]

22010.

There is hereby created the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. The commission is comprised of 14 members.

(a) Thirteen of the members shall be appointed by the Controller as follows:

(1) Two members who shall each have at least 10 years of experience with, or providing professional services to, a general contracting firm engaged, during that period, in public works construction in California.

(2) Two members who shall each have at least 10 years of experience with, or providing professional services to, a firm or firms engaged, during that period, in
 subcontracting for public works construction in California.

(3) Two members who shall each be a member in good standing of, or have provided professional services to, an organized labor union with at least 10 years of experience in public works construction in California.

(4) Seven members who shall each be experienced in, and knowledgeable of, public works construction under contracts let by public agencies; two each representing cities, counties, respectively, and two members representing school districts, and one member representing a special district. At least one of the two county representatives shall be a county auditor or his or her designee.

(b) The member of the Contractors’ State License Board who is a general engineering contractor as that term is defined in Section 7056 of the Business and Professions
 Code shall serve as an ex officio voting member.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 24.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22011.

The Controller, in an effort to select highly qualified commission members, shall solicit from organized representatives of the construction industry and public agencies recommendations for appointments to the commission.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21101 (as added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1054) by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 41.)
-------------------------------------------

22012.

At least one commission member of the seven representing the construction industry and at least one of the seven representing public agencies shall have previous accounting experience.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 296, Sec. 27.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

22013.

The commission members shall select a chairperson from among its membership. The chairperson shall serve as chair for a term of two years from the date of selection. In no event shall two consecutive chairpersons be appointees representing either the construction industry or public agencies.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2011, Ch. 110, Sec. 1.   (AB 943)   Effective January 1, 2012.)
-------------------------------------------

22014.

(a) The members of the commission shall hold office for terms of three years, and until their successors are appointed.

(b) Members may be reappointed, by the Controller, for subsequent terms of three years.

(c) The Controller may appoint a successor for any commissioner after his or her three-year term expires.

(d) The Controller shall, within 120 days, appoint a replacement to fill any vacancy on the commission.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 25.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22015.

(a) The Controller shall make available for the conduct of the commission’s business, such staff and other support as does not conflict with the accomplishment of the other business of the office of the Controller.

(b) Each member of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for travel and other expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of the member’s duties. Reimbursement rates shall conform to the Controller’s travel guideline rates. 

(c) The commission may accept grants from federal, state, or local public agencies, or from private foundations or individuals, in order to assist
 it in carrying out its duties, functions, and powers under this chapter.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 26.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22016.

The commission shall meet not less than once each year, at a time and place chosen by its membership.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21106 by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 46.)
-------------------------------------------

22017.

The commission shall do all of the following:

(a) After due deliberation and study, recommend for adoption by the Controller, uniform construction cost accounting procedures for implementation by public agencies in the performance of, or in contracting for, construction on public projects. The procedures shall, to the extent deemed feasible and practicable by the commission, incorporate, or be consistent with construction cost accounting procedures and reporting requirements utilized by state and federal agencies on public projects, and be uniformly applicable to all public agencies which elect to utilize the uniform procedures. As part of its deliberations and review, the commission shall take into
 consideration relevant provisions of the Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76, as periodically revised.

(b) After due deliberation and study, recommend for adoption by the Controller cost accounting procedures designed especially for implementation by California cities with a population of less than 75,000. The procedures shall incorporate cost accounting and reporting requirements deemed practicable and applicable to all cities under 75,000 population which elect to utilize the uniform procedures. For purposes of these cost accounting procedures, the following shall apply:

(1) Cities with a population of less than 75,000 shall assume an overhead rate equal to 20 percent of the total costs of a public project, including the costs of material, equipment, and labor.

(2) Cities with a population of more than
 75,000 may either calculate an actual overhead rate or assume an overhead rate equal to 30 percent of the total costs of a public project, including the costs of material, equipment, and labor.

(c) Recommend for adoption by the Controller, procedures and standards for the periodic evaluation and adjustment, as necessary, of the monetary limits specified in Section 22032.

(d) The commission shall make an annual report to the Legislature with respect to its activities and operations, together with those recommendations as it deems necessary.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 27.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22018.

The Controller shall, upon receipt of the commission’s recommendations, review and evaluate the recommended procedures and either formally adopt or reject the recommended procedures within 90 days of submission by the commission.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21108 by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 48.)
-------------------------------------------

22019.

Upon determining that the recommended uniform construction cost accounting procedures will serve the best interests of the state and public agencies, and upon formal adoption by the Controller, the Controller shall promulgate the uniform procedure for all public agencies electing to participate, together with instructions for their adoption and implementation by any public agency.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21109 by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 49.)
-------------------------------------------

22020.

In accordance with procedures and standards adopted pursuant to Section 22017, every five years the commission shall consider whether there have been material changes in public construction costs and make recommendations to the Controller regarding adjustments in the monetary limits prescribed by Section 22032, but in no case shall the amount, as adjusted, be less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000). The Controller shall notify all participating public
 agencies of the adjustment prior to the effective date. That notification shall also describe the provisions of this chapter and the benefits of using its provisions.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2018, Ch. 169, Sec. 1.   (AB 2249)   Effective January 1, 2019.)
-------------------------------------------



  ARTICLE 3. Public Projects: Alternative Procedure [22030. - 22045.]

22030.

(a) This article applies only to a public agency whose governing board has by resolution elected to become subject to the uniform construction cost accounting procedures set forth in Article 2 (commencing with Section 22010) and which has notified the Controller of that election. In the event of a conflict with any other provision of law relative to bidding procedures, this article shall apply to any public agency which has adopted a resolution and so notified the Controller.

(b) A county, whether general law or charter, containing a population of less than 500,000 may award individual annual contracts as provided in Section 20128.5.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 28.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22031.

(a) Prior to January 1, 2013, this article shall not prohibit a board of supervisors or a county road commissioner from utilizing, as an alternative to the procedures set forth in this article, the procedures set forth in Article 25 (commencing with Section 20390) of Chapter 1.

(b) On or after January 1, 2013, this article shall not prohibit a board of supervisors or a county road commissioner from utilizing, as an alternative to the procedures set forth in this article, the procedures set forth in Article 25 (commencing with Section 20390) of Chapter 1 for both of the following:

(1) Maintenance and emergency work.

(2) New road construction and road reconstruction as long as the total value of the new road construction and the road reconstruction performed under the procedures set forth in subdivision (c) of Section 20395 during a fiscal year does not exceed 30 percent of the total value of all work performed by force account other than maintenance as reported in the Controller’s Streets and Roads Annual Report as of March 1 of each year prior to the fiscal year.

(c) The value of force account work necessary to facilitate capital projects for the purpose of contracting to the private sector, including design, engineering, inspection, testing, and other force account work necessary to administer private contracts, shall be excluded from the 30-percent limit in subdivision (b).

(d) The value of force account work necessary to facilitate projects performed by county employees, including design, engineering, inspection, testing, and other force account work necessary to administer work performed under subdivision (b), shall apply to the 30-percent limit in subdivision (b).

(e) On or after January 1, 2013, for a county with a population of less than 50,000, this article shall not prohibit a board of supervisors or a county road commissioner from utilizing, as an alternative to the procedures set forth in this article, the procedures set forth in Article 25 (commencing with Section 20390) of Chapter 1.

(f) The requirements set forth in Section 22038 shall apply to any county subject to this
 section.

(g) Any county board of supervisors or county road commissioner acting pursuant to the authority granted in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) shall publicly declare its intention to use this authority prior to commencing work. The public declaration may be on a project-by-project basis, via a list of anticipated projects for the fiscal year, or via a list that may be included in the county’s annual budget.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2014, Ch. 345, Sec. 3.   (AB 2752)   Effective January 1, 2015.)
-------------------------------------------

22032.

(a) Public projects of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) or less may be performed by the employees of a public agency by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.

(b) Public projects of two hundred twenty thousand dollars ($220,000) or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in this article.

(c) Public projects of more than two hundred twenty thousand dollars ($220,000) shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 2.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22033.

It shall be unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article requiring work to be done by contract after competitive bidding.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21203 (as added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1054) by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 54.)
-------------------------------------------

22034.

Each public agency that elects to become subject to the uniform construction accounting procedures set forth in Article 2 (commencing with Section 22010) shall enact an informal bidding ordinance to govern the selection of contractors to perform public projects pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 22032. The ordinance shall include all of the following:

(a) Notice to contractors shall be provided in accordance with either paragraph (1) or (2), or both.

(1) The public agency shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. Minimum criteria for development and maintenance of the contractors list shall be determined by the commission. All contractors on the list for the category of
 work being bid shall be mailed, faxed, or emailed a notice inviting informal bids unless the product or service is proprietary. All mailing of notices to contractors pursuant to this subdivision shall be completed not less than 10 calendar days before bids are due.

(2) The public agency may elect to mail, fax, or email a notice inviting informal bids to all construction trade journals specified in Section 22036.

(b) The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

(c) The governing body of the public agency may delegate the authority to award informal contracts to the public works director, general manager, purchasing agent, or other appropriate person.

(d) If all bids received are in excess of two hundred twenty thousand dollars ($220,000), the governing body of the public agency may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at two hundred thirty-five thousand dollars ($235,000) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the public agency was reasonable.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 3.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22035.

(a) In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the governing body may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the governing body, by contractor, or by a combination of the two.

(b) In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the public agency shall comply with Chapter 2.5 (commencing with Section 22050).

(History: Repealed and added by Stats. 1994, Ch. 803, Sec. 87.   Effective January 1, 1995.)
-------------------------------------------

22035.5.

In counties that are under court order to relieve justice facility overcrowding, the procedures and restrictions specified in Section 20134 shall apply to all contracts issued under this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1991, Ch. 993, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22036.

The commission shall determine, on a county-by-county basis, the appropriate construction trade journals which shall receive mailed, faxed, or emailed notice of all informal and formal construction contracts being bid for work within the specified county.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2015, Ch. 269, Sec. 30.   (SB 184)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22037.

Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. The notice shall be published at least 14 calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the jurisdiction of the public agency; or, if there is no newspaper printed and published within the jurisdiction of the public agency, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated within the jurisdiction of the public agency, or, if there is no newspaper which is circulated within the jurisdiction of the public agency, publication shall be by posting the notice in at least three places within the jurisdiction of the public agency as have been designated by
 ordinance or regulation of the public agency as places for the posting of its notices. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in Section 22036. The notice shall be sent at least 15 calendar days before the date of opening the bids. In addition to notice required by this section, the public agency may give such other notice as it deems proper.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2010, Ch. 62, Sec. 1.   (AB 2184)   Effective January 1, 2011.)
-------------------------------------------

22038.

(a) In its discretion, the public agency may reject any bids presented, if the agency, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the agency, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the agency’s intention to reject the bid and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the agency intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the public agency shall have the option of either of the following:

(1) Abandoning the project or readvertising for bids in the manner described by this article.

(2) By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its governing body declaring that the project can be performed more economically by the employees of the public agency, may have the project done by force account without further complying with this article.

(b) If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the public agency may accept the one it chooses.

(c) If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the public agency by force account, or negotiated contract without further complying with this article.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2003, Ch. 296, Sec. 29.   Effective January 1, 2004.)
-------------------------------------------

22039.

The governing body of the participating public agency or its designated representative shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all public projects exceeding the amount specified in subdivision (c) of Section 22032.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 4.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22040.

Any person may examine the plans, specifications, or working details, or all of these, adopted by the public agency for any project.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21210 (as added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1054) by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 62.)
-------------------------------------------

22041.

This article does not apply to the construction of any public building used for facilities of juvenile forestry camps or juvenile homes, ranches, or camps established under Article 15 (commencing with Section 880) of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, if a major portion of the construction work is to be performed by wards of the juvenile court assigned to those camps, ranches, or homes.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21211 (as added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 1054) by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 63.)
-------------------------------------------

22042.

The commission shall review the accounting procedures of any participating public agency where an interested party presents evidence that the work undertaken by the public agency falls within any of the following categories:

(a) Is to be performed by a public agency after rejection of all bids, claiming work can be done less expensively by the public agency.

(b) Exceeded the force account limits set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 22032.

(c) Has been improperly classified as maintenance.

(d) Has been split or separated into smaller work orders or
 projects, in violation of Section 22033.

(e) Has exceeded the limits or otherwise not met the requirements set forth in subdivisions (b) and (c) of Section 22032.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 5.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22042.5.

The commission shall review practices of any participating public agency where an interested party presents evidence that the public agency is not in compliance with Section 22034 or 22037.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 6.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22043.

(a) In those circumstances set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 22042, a request for commission review shall be in writing, sent by certified or registered mail received by the commission postmarked not later than eight business days from the date the public agency has rejected all bids.

(b) In those circumstances set forth in subdivision (b), (c), (d), or (e) of Section 22042, a request for commission review shall be by letter received by the commission not later than eight days from the date an interested party formally complains to the public agency.

(c) The commission review shall commence immediately and conclude within the following number of days from the receipt of the request for commission
 review:

(1) Forty-five days for a review that falls within subdivision (a) of Section 22042.

(2) Ninety days for a review that falls within subdivision (b), (c), (d), or (e) of Section 22042.

(d) During the review of a project that falls within subdivision (a) of Section 22042, the agency shall not proceed on the project until a final decision is received by the commission.

(e) A request for commission review pursuant to Section 22042.5 shall be in writing, sent by certified or registered mail, and received by the commission no later than eight days from the day an interested party formally complains to the public agency. The commission review shall commence immediately and conclude within 90 days from the receipt of the request for commission
 review.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 7.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22044.

The commission shall prepare written findings, which shall be presented to the public agency within 30 calendar days of formal commission review. Should the commission find that the provisions of this chapter or of the uniform cost accounting procedures provided for in this chapter were not complied with by the public agency, the following steps shall be implemented by that agency:

(a) On those projects set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 22042, the public agency has the option of either (1) abandoning the project, or (2) awarding the project to the lowest responsible bidder.

(b) On those projects set forth in subdivision (b), (c), (d), or (e) of Section 22042, the public agency shall present the commission’s findings
 to its governing body within 30 calendar days of receipt of written notice of the findings and that governing body shall conduct a public hearing with regard to the commission’s findings within 60 calendar days of receipt of the findings.

(c) (1) On findings of noncompliance pursuant to Section 22042.5, the public agency shall notify its governing body of the commission’s findings within 60 calendar days of receipt of written notice of the findings from the commission.

(2) The public agency shall notify the commission in writing, within 90 days of receipt of written notice of the findings, of the public agency’s best efforts to comply.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 953, Sec. 8.   (AB 2192)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22044.5.

If the commission makes a finding, in accordance with Section 22043, on three separate occasions within a 10-year period, that the work undertaken by a public agency falls within any of the categories described in Section 22042, the commission shall notify the public agency of that finding in writing by certified mail and the public agency shall not use the bidding procedures provided by this article for five years from the date of the commission’s findings.

(History: Added by Stats. 2006, Ch. 192, Sec. 1.   Effective January 1, 2007.)
-------------------------------------------

22045.

(a) No later than January 1, 1985, the commission shall recommend, for adoption by the Controller, written procedures implementing the accounting procedures review provided for in this article.

(b) The Controller shall, upon receipt of the commission’s recommendation, review and evaluate the recommended procedures and either formally adopt or reject the recommended procedures within 90 days of submission of the commission.

(History: Added by renumbering Section 21215 by Stats. 1986, Ch. 1019, Sec. 67.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 2.5. Emergency Contracting Procedures [22050. - 22050.]

22050.

(a) (1) In the case of an emergency, a public agency, pursuant to a four-fifths vote of its governing body, may repair or replace a public facility, take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, and procure the necessary equipment, services, and supplies for those purposes, without giving notice for bids to let contracts.

(2) Before a governing body takes any action pursuant to paragraph (1), it shall make a finding, based on substantial evidence set forth in the minutes of its meeting, that the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for bids, and that the action is necessary to respond to the
 emergency.

(b) (1) The governing body, by a four-fifths vote, may delegate, by resolution or ordinance, to the appropriate county administrative officer, city manager, chief engineer, or other nonelected agency officer, the authority to order any action pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a).

(2) If the public agency has no county administrative officer, city manager, chief engineer, or other nonelected agency officer, the governing body, by a four-fifths vote, may delegate to an elected officer the authority to order any action specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a).

(3) If a person with authority delegated pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) orders any action specified in paragraph (1) of
 subdivision (a), that person shall report to the governing body, at its next meeting required pursuant to this section, the reasons justifying why the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for bids and why the action is necessary to respond to the emergency.

(c) (1) If the governing body orders any action specified in subdivision (a), the governing body shall review the emergency action at its next regularly scheduled meeting and, except as specified below, at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, to determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action. If the governing body meets weekly, it may review the emergency action in accordance with this paragraph every 14 days.

(2) If a person with authority delegated pursuant to subdivision (b) orders any action specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a), the governing body shall initially review the emergency action not later than 7 days after the action, or at its next regularly scheduled meeting if that meeting will occur not later than 14 days after the action, and at least at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, to determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action, unless a person with authority delegated pursuant to subdivision (b) has terminated that action prior to the governing body reviewing the emergency action and making a determination pursuant to this subdivision. If the governing body meets weekly, it may, after the initial review, review the emergency action in accordance with this paragraph every 14 days.

(3) When the governing body reviews the emergency action pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2), it shall terminate the action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed by giving notice for bids to let contracts.

(d) As used in this section, “public agency” has the same meaning as defined in Section 22002.

(e) A three-member governing body may take actions pursuant to subdivision (a), (b), or (c) by a two-thirds vote.

(f) This section applies only to emergency action taken pursuant to Sections 20134, 20168, 20205.1, 20213, 20223, 20233, 20253, 20273, 20283, 20293, 20303, 20313, 20321, 20331,
 20567, 20586, 20604, 20635, 20645, 20682, 20682.5, 20736, 20751.1, 20806, 20812, 20914, 20918, 20926, 20931, 20941, 20961, 20991, 21020.2, 21024, 21031, 21043, 21061, 21072, 21081, 21091, 21101, 21111, 21121, 21131, 21141, 21151, 21161, 21171, 21181, 21191, 21196, 21203, 21212, 21221, 21231, 21241, 21251, 21261, 21271, 21290, 21311, 21321, 21331, 21341, 21351, 21361, 21371, 21381, 21391, 21401, 21411, 21421, 21431, 21441, 21451, 21461, 21472, 21482, 21491, 21501, 21511, 21521, 21531, 21541, 21552, 21567, 21572, 21581, 21591, 21601, 21618, 21624, 21631, 21641, and 22035.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 111, Sec. 2.   (AB 2634)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3. Acquisition of Electronic Data Processing [22101. - 22109.]

22101.

The Legislature has found that electronic data-processing equipment, goods, and services are unique, and of such importance to state programs as to warrant a separate acquisition authority therefor. The Legislature finds that the Southern California Rapid Transit District has needs similar to the state with respect to acquisition of electronic data-processing goods and services.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22102.

For purposes of this chapter, “district” means the Southern California Rapid Transit District.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22103.

(a) Acquisition of electronic data-processing goods and services by the district shall be conducted through competitive means, except when the district determines one of the following:

(1) The goods and services proposed for acquisition are the only goods and services which can meet the district’s needs.

(2) The goods and services are needed in case of an emergency where immediate acquisition is necessary for the efficient operation and preservation of the district’s services.

(b) The mode of acquisition to be used and the procedure to be followed shall be approved by the district which shall adopt appropriate criteria and procedures to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter. However, the procedure shall provide for issuance by the district of a solicitation document to, and for the submission of proposals by, prospective contractors.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22104.

(a) Contract awards shall be based on the proposal which provides the most cost-effective solution to the district’s requirements, as determined by the evaluation criteria contained in the solicitation document. The evaluation procedures may provide for the selection of a vendor on a basis other than cost alone.

(b) Evaluation of proposals for the purpose of determining contract award shall provide for consideration of a proposer’s best financing alternative unless the district determines that a particular financing alternative should not be considered.

(c) A vendor may be excluded from proposal processes, if the vendor’s performance with respect to a previously awarded contract has been determined unsatisfactory by the district, provided that the exclusion shall not exceed one year for any one determination of unsatisfactory performance and provided further that any excluded vendor may at any time during the exclusion be reinstated upon demonstration to the district’s satisfaction that the problems which resulted in his or her exclusion have been corrected.

(d) To the extent practical, the solicitation documents shall provide for a contract to be written to enable acquisition of additional items to avoid essentially redundant acquisition processes when it can be determined that it is economical to do so.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22105.

Protest procedures shall be provided to allow proposers an opportunity to formally protest any acquisition conducted in accordance with this chapter. Authority to protest may be limited to participating proposers. The procuring officer of the district, or the person designated by the procuring officer, is authorized to consider and decide on initial protests. A decision regarding an initial protest shall be final. If, prior to making an award, any proposer who submitted an offer files a protest with the district against awarding the contract or purchase order on the ground that his or her bid or proposal should have been selected in accordance with the selection criteria in the selection document, the contract or purchase order shall not be awarded until either the protest has been withdrawn or the district has made a final decision as to the action to be taken on the protest. A protestor, within 10 calendar days of filing a protest, shall file with the district a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds of the protest and the facts in support thereof.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22106.

Electronic data-processing goods which are determined to be surplus to the district’s needs shall be disposed of in a manner best serving the interests of the district, which may include auction, sale, or transfer to other governmental entities.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22107.

The district may establish policies and procedures for all of the following:

(a) Price negotiation with respect to all acquisitions conducted under this chapter.

(b) System or equipment component performance or availability standards, including an assessment of the added cost to the district to receive contractual guarantee of a level of performance.

(c) Requirement of a bond or assessment of a cost penalty with respect to a contract or consideration of a contract offered by a vendor whose performance has been determined unsatisfactory by the district.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22108.

The district may adopt additional rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------

22109.

Any contract for electronic data-processing goods and services, to be manufactured or performed by the contractor especially for the district and not suitable for sale to others in the ordinary course of the contractor’s business, may provide for such terms and conditions as the district deems necessary to protect its interests including, but not limited to, progress payments as the work is performed, provided that at least 10 percent of the contract price is required to be withheld until final delivery and acceptance of the goods or services, and that the contractor is required to submit a performance bond of at least one-half the total payable under the contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1983, Ch. 586, Sec. 1.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 3.5. Recycled Product Procurement Mandates Pertaining to Local Governments [22150. - 22154.]

22150.

(a) If fitness and quality are equal, each local public entity shall purchase recycled products, as defined in Section 12200, instead of nonrecycled products whenever recycled products are available at the same or a lesser total cost than nonrecycled items.

(b) A local public entity may give preference to suppliers of recycled products.

(c) A local public entity may define the amount of this preference.

(History: Added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 590, Sec. 39.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

22151.

In bids in which the local government has reserved the right to make multiple awards, the recycled product preference cost shall be applied, to the extent possible, so as to maximize the dollar participation of firms offering recycled products in the contract award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 590, Sec. 39.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

22152.

(a) All local public entities shall require all business, as defined in Section 12200, to certify in writing the minimum, if not exact, percentage of postconsumer materials in the products, materials, goods, or supplies, offered or sold. All contract provisions impeding the consideration of recycled products shall be deleted in favor of performance standards.

(b) With respect to printer or duplication cartridges that comply with the requirements of subdivision (e) of Section 12156, the certification required by this subdivision shall specify that the cartridges so comply.

(History: Added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 590, Sec. 39.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

22153.

All printing contracts made by any local public entity shall provide that the paper used shall meet the recycled content requirements of Section 12209.

(History: Added by Stats. 2005, Ch. 590, Sec. 39.   Effective January 1, 2006.)
-------------------------------------------

22154.

(a) All businesses shall certify in writing to the contracting officer, or his or her representative, the minimum, if not exact, percentage of postconsumer material in the products, materials, goods, or supplies being offered or sold to any local public entity.

(b) With respect to printer or duplication cartridges that comply with the requirements of subdivision (e) of Section 12156, the certification required by this section shall specify that the cartridges so comply.

(c) A local public entity may waive the certification requirement if the percentage of postconsumer material in the products, materials, goods, or supplies can be verified in a written advertisement, including, but not limited to, a product label, a catalog, or a manufacturer or vendor Internet Web site.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2007, Ch. 130, Sec. 198.   Effective January 1, 2008.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4. Local Agency Design-Build Projects [22160. - 22169.]

22160.

(a) The Legislature finds and declares that the design-build method of project delivery, using a best value procurement methodology, has been authorized for various agencies that have reported benefits from such projects including reduced project costs, expedited project completion, and design features that are not achievable through the traditional design-bid-build method.

(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the following occur:

(1) This chapter provides general authorization for local agencies to use design-build for projects, excluding projects on the state highway system.

(2) This chapter shall not be deemed to provide a preference for the design-build method over other procurement methodologies.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 14.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22161.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that relate to price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the local agency and meeting the objectives of the project, selection of the best proposal for a stipulated sum established by the procuring agency, or a tradeoff between price and other specified factors.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build
 entity in or about the construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity.

(d) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(e) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and
 the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(f) “Local agency” means the following:

(1) A city, county, or city and county.

(2) A special district that operates wastewater facilities, solid waste management facilities, water recycling facilities, or fire protection facilities.

(3) Any transit district, included transit district, municipal operator, included municipal operator, any consolidated agency, as described in Section 132353.1 of the Public Utilities Code, any joint powers
 authority, any county transportation commission created pursuant to Section 130050 of the Public Utilities Code, or any other local or regional agency, responsible for the construction of transit projects.

(4) The San Diego Association of Governments, as referenced in the San Diego Regional Transportation Consolidation Act (Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 132350) of Division 12.7 of the Public Utilities Code).

(5) The Stanislaus Regional Water Authority.

(g) (1) Except as specified in subdivision (h), for a local agency defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (f), “project” means the construction of a building or buildings and improvements directly related to the construction of a building or buildings, county sanitation wastewater treatment
 facilities, and park and recreational facilities, but does not include the construction of other infrastructure, including, but not limited to, streets and highways, public rail transit, or water resources facilities and infrastructure. For a local agency defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (f) that operates wastewater facilities, solid waste management facilities, or water recycling facilities, “project” also means the construction of regional and local wastewater treatment facilities, regional and local solid waste facilities, or regional and local water recycling facilities.

(2) For a local agency defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (f), “project” means the construction of regional and local wastewater treatment facilities, regional and local solid waste facilities, regional and local water recycling facilities, or fire protection facilities.

(3) Except as specified in
 subdivision (h), for a local agency defined in paragraph (3) of subdivision (f), “project” means a transit capital project that begins a project solicitation on or after January 1, 2015. A “project,” as defined by this paragraph, that begins the solicitation process before January 1, 2015, is subject to Article 6.8 (commencing with Section 20209.5) of Chapter 1. “Project,” as defined by this paragraph, does not include state highway construction or local street and road projects.

(4) For a local agency defined in paragraph (4) of subdivision (f), “project” has the same meaning as in paragraph (3), and shall also include development projects adjacent, or physically or functionally related, to transit facilities developed or jointly developed by the local agency.

(5) For a local agency defined in paragraph (5) of subdivision (f), “project” means the Stanislaus Regional Water
 Authority’s Regional Surface Water Supply Project.

(h) In recognition of the additional transportation funds made available by the Road Repair and Accountability Act of 2017 (Chapter 5 of the Statutes of 2017), and to accelerate the delivery of transportation projects to the public, in addition to the authority provided in other subdivisions of this section, for a local agency defined in paragraph (1) or (3) of subdivision (f), for up to six projects to be selected by the Department of Transportation, a “project” also means construction or rehabilitation of local streets and roads, including, but not limited to, bridge replacement and railroad grade separations. Consistent with Provision 2 of Item 2660-110-0042 of Section 2.00 of the Budget Act of 2016, as amended by Chapter 7 of the Statutes of 2017, three projects shall be reserved for and selected by the Riverside County Transportation Commission, with the first priority for the projects
 listed in that budget item.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 201, Sec. 1.   (AB 400)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.

(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), and notwithstanding any other law, a local agency, with approval of its governing body, may procure design-build contracts for public works projects in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000), awarding the contract either the low bid or the best value, provided that this article shall not apply to any projects on the state highway system.

(b) When a local agency described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (f) of Section 22161 awards a contract for the acquisition and installation of technology applications or surveillance equipment designed to enhance safety, disaster preparedness, and homeland security efforts, there shall be no cost threshold and the
 contract may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or by using the best value method.

(c) The local agency shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity, that performs services for the local agency relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team. This conflict-of-interest policy shall apply to each local agency entering into design-build contracts authorized under this chapter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 14.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.4.

Upon approval of its governing body, a city, county, or city and county may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to award contracts for construction of projects that are necessary in order to comply with construction-related accessibility standards, as defined in Section 65946 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 900, Sec. 1.   (SB 1354)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.5.

Upon approval by its governing body, the Santa Clara Valley Water District may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to award a contract for the following projects:

(a) Flood protection improvements.

(b) Habitat restorations or enhancements.

(c) Groundwater recharge or storage facilities.

(d) Water treatment facilities.

(e) The retrofit, repair, or expansion of existing surface water storage facilities.

(History: Added by Stats. 2017, Ch. 821, Sec. 4.   (AB 851)   Effective January 1, 2018.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.6.

(a) Upon approval of the board of supervisors, the County of Orange may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to award a contract for the following projects:

(1) Flood protection improvements.

(2) Harbor and beach improvements.

(3) Bikeway improvements.

(b) In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 22164, for a project authorized under subdivision (a), the county shall be responsible for the performance of, and county employees in Orange
 County Public Works may perform, project development services, including performance specifications, preliminary engineering, procurement services and the preparation of project reports, and construction inspection services, excluding specialty bridge inspectors. The county shall also be the responsible agency for, and county employees in Orange County Public Works may perform, the preparation of documents that may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering quality of
 materials, equipment, and workmanship, preliminary plans, and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the needs of the County of Orange.

(c) For a project authorized under subdivision (a), the county shall be limited to no more than one project per year in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000).

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 239, Sec. 1.   (AB 2654)   Effective January 1, 2019.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.7.

(a) Upon approval of the governing body, the Orange County Flood Control District, as defined in Chapter 36 of the Orange County Flood Control Act, Sections 1 to 23 of the Orange County Flood Control Act, Water Code Appendix, may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to award a contract for flood protection improvements.

(b) In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 22164, for a project authorized under subdivision (a), the Orange County Flood Control District shall be responsible for the performance of, and county employees in Orange County Public Works
 may perform, project development services, including performance specifications, preliminary engineering, procurement services and the preparation of project reports, and construction inspection services, excluding specialty bridge inspectors. The county shall also be the responsible agency for, and county employees in Orange County Public Works may perform, the preparation of documents that may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering quality of materials, equipment, and workmanship, preliminary plans, and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the needs of the Orange County
 Flood Control District.

(c) For a project authorized under subdivision (a), the district shall be limited to no more than twelve projects in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000) prior to January 1, 2025.

(History: Added by Stats. 2018, Ch. 239, Sec. 2.   (AB 2654)   Effective January 1, 2019.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.8.

(a) Upon approval of its governing body, the Paradise Irrigation District may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to award a contract for a water conveyance pipeline from the Town of Paradise to the City of Chico.

(b) Upon approval of a majority of the Paradise Town Council, the Town of Paradise may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to provide for the provision of sewer treatment to the Town of Paradise, including for infrastructure connecting the Town of Paradise to an existing treatment facility.

(History: Added by Stats. 2021, Ch. 689, Sec. 1.   (AB 36)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22162.9.

(a) Upon approval of the city council of the City of Long Beach, the City of Long Beach may use the design-build contracting process described in this chapter to award contracts for curb ramps that are compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

(b) In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 22164, for a project authorized under subdivision (a), the city and city employees in the City of Long Beach Public Works Department may perform project development services, including performance specifications, preliminary engineering, procurement services and the preparation of project reports, and construction inspection services, excluding specialty
 bridge inspections. The city shall also be the responsible agency for, and city employees in the Public Works Department may perform, the preparation of documents that may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering quality of materials, equipment, and workmanship, preliminary plans, and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the needs of the city.

(c) For a project authorized under subdivision (a), the city shall be limited to no more than 3,000 ramps, with the total cost not to exceed twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) per year,
 that are subject to completion prior to January 1, 2025.

(History: Added by Stats. 2020, Ch. 54, Sec. 1.   (AB 2932)   Effective September 9, 2020.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22164.

The procurement process for the design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) (1) The local agency shall prepare a set of documents setting forth the scope and estimated price of the project. The documents may include, but need not be limited to, the size, type, and desired design character of the project, performance specifications covering the quality of materials, equipment, workmanship, preliminary plans or building layouts, or any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the local agency’s needs. The performance specifications and any plans shall be prepared by a design professional who is duly licensed and registered in California.

(2) The documents shall not include a design-build-operate contract for any project. The documents, however, may include operations during a training or transition period but shall not include long-term operations for any project.

(b) The local agency shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to prequalify or short-list the design-build entities whose proposals shall be evaluated for final selection. The request for qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate proposals, the procedure for final
 selection of the design-build entity, and any other information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, acceptable safety record, and all other nonprice-related factors.

(3) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the local agency. In preparing the standard template, the local agency may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other local agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this article. The template shall require the following information:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the
 organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(4) (A) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(B) Information required under this subdivision that is not otherwise a public record under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code) shall not be open to public inspection.

(c) (1) A design-build entity shall not be prequalified or short-listed unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the local agency that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if any of the following
 requirements are met:

(A) The local agency has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the local agency prior to January 1, 2017.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(d) Based on the documents prepared as described in subdivision (a), the local agency shall prepare a request for proposals that invites prequalified or short-listed entities to submit competitive sealed proposals in the manner prescribed by the local agency. The request for proposals shall include, but need not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Identification of the basic scope and needs of the project or contract, the estimated cost of the project, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate proposals, whether the contract will be awarded on the basis of low bid or best value, and any other
 information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating proposals, including, but not limited to, cost or price and all nonprice-related factors.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for proposals.

(4) Where a best value selection method is used, the local agency may reserve the right to request proposal revisions and hold discussions and negotiations with responsive proposers, in which case the local agency shall so specify in the request for proposals and shall publish separately or incorporate into the request for proposals
 applicable procedures to be observed by the local agency to ensure that any discussions or negotiations are conducted in good faith.

(e) For those projects utilizing low bid as the final selection method, the competitive bidding process shall result in lump-sum bids by the prequalified or short-listed design-build entities, and awards shall be made to the design-build entity that is the lowest responsible bidder.

(f) For those projects utilizing best value as a selection method, the design-build competition shall progress as follows:

(1) Competitive proposals shall be evaluated by using only the criteria and selection procedures specifically identified in the request for proposals. The following minimum factors, however, shall
 be weighted as deemed appropriate by the local agency:

(A) Price, unless a stipulated sum is specified.

(B) Technical design and construction expertise.

(C) Life-cycle costs over 15 or more years.

(2) Pursuant to subdivision (d), the local agency may hold discussions or negotiations with responsive proposers using the process articulated in the local agency’s request for proposals.

(3) When the evaluation is complete, the responsive proposers shall be ranked based on a determination of value provided, provided that no more than three proposers are required to be ranked.

(4) The award of the contract shall be made to the responsible design-build entity whose proposal is determined by the local agency to have offered the best value to the public.

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the local agency shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award.

(6) The statement regarding the local agency’s contract award, described in paragraph (5), and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2021, Ch. 615, Sec. 365.   (AB 474)   Effective January 1, 2022.   Operative January 1, 2023, pursuant to Sec. 463 of Stats. 2021, Ch. 615.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22165.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the local agency, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The local agency shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 14.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22166.

(a) The local agency, in each design-build request for proposals, may identify specific types of subcontractors that must be included in the design-build entity statement of qualifications and proposal. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the proposal shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, the design-build entity shall proceed as follows in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work:

(1) Provide public notice of availability of
 work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the local agency, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract either on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder. The process may include prequalification or short-listing. The foregoing process does not apply to construction subcontractors listed in the original proposal. Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 14.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22167.

(a) If the local agency elects to award a project pursuant to this article, retention proceeds withheld by the local agency from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation of bids.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld may not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any subcontractor that is not a member of the
 design-build entity, prior to or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 14.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22168.

Nothing in this article affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2014, Ch. 931, Sec. 14.   (SB 785)   Effective January 1, 2015.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22169.)
-------------------------------------------

22169.

This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2031, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2023, Ch. 201, Sec. 2.   (AB 400)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2031, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Chapter 4, commencing with Section 22160.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4.1. Local Agency Progressive Design-Build Contracting [22170. - 22174.]

22170.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) (1) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that may include, but are not limited to, price, features, function, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance.

(2) A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the local agency and the objectives of the project.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will
 perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(d) “Design-build project” means any project that treats, pumps, stores, or conveys water, wastewater,
 recycled water, advanced treated water, or supporting facilities using the progressive design-build construction procurement process described in this chapter.

(e) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(f) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the local agency and the design-build entity for the design-build entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(g) “Local agency” means a city, county, city and county, or special district authorized by law to provide for the production, storage, supply, treatment, or distribution of any water from any source.

(h) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project.

(i) “Qualifications-based selection” means the process by which the local agency solicits for services from the design-build entities and that price is not the sole factor as the basis of award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22171.

A local agency may procure progressive design-build contracts and use the progressive design-build contracting process described in this chapter for up to 15 public works projects in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000) for each project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22171.5.

A local agency entering into design-build contracts authorized under this chapter shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the local agency relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22172.

The procurement process for progressive design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) The local agency shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to select a design-build entity to execute the project. The request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, the following elements:

(1) Documentation of the size, type, and desired design character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the local agency’s needs, including the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate the design-build entity’s
 qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and any 
 other information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other non-price-related factors. The local agency may require that a preliminary cost estimate be included in the design-build entities’ responses and consider those costs in evaluating the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the local
 agency. In preparing the standard template, the local agency may consult with the construction industry, the building trades and surety industry, and other local agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this chapter. The template shall require the following information:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the entity’s shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of the statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that
 proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history
 and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(5) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(b) (1) A design-build entity shall not be evaluated for selection 
 unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment to the local agency that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if one or more of the following requirements are met:

(A) The local agency has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the local agency before January 1, 2023.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as provided in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(c) At the close of the solicitation period, the local agency shall review the submissions. The local agency may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build
 entity’s statement of qualifications. The local agency may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the project.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the local agency shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the local agency’s contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22172.1.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the local agency, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The local agency shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22172.2.

(a) After selecting a design-build entity based upon qualifications, the local agency may enter into a contract and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a guaranteed maximum price for the project.

(b) (1) Upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the project, the local agency, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract with the design build entity to contract for the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project, consistent with the guaranteed maximum price. In the event that there are unforeseen
 site conditions, the local agency may amend its contract with the design build entity accordingly and consistent with the guaranteed maximum price, to enable the entity to complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(2) If the cost for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project exceed the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the cost for these activities are less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build
 entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the cost and the guaranteed maximum price unless there is a prior written agreement concerning the sharing of these funds. For purposes of this section, cost shall include the design build entity’s direct costs, general conditions, overhead, and fee.

(c) (1) If the local agency and the design-build entity do not reach agreement on a guaranteed maximum price, or the local agency otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract to complete the remaining work, the local agency may solicit proposals to complete the project from firms that submitted 
 statements of qualifications pursuant to Section 22172. The local agency may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the city, county, city and county, or special district, as applicable, to do so, formally solicit proposals from other design-build entities, and contract award shall be made on a best value basis.

(2) The design professionals responsible for performing design services on behalf of a design build entity that has been replaced pursuant to paragraph (1) shall have sole liability for their design errors and omissions, provided the local agency elects to use their complete and stamped designs with subsequent design build entities or licensed contractors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22172.3.

(a) The local agency, in each design-build request for qualifications, may identify specific types of subcontractors that shall be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications, the design-build entity shall proceed as listed in this subdivision in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the
 contract price allocable to construction work for projects with a contract value of greater than or equal to ten million dollars ($10,000,000).

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the local agency, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract on a best value basis. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(c) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this
 subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(d) A construction subcontractor licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code that provides design services used on a project authorized by this chapter shall not be subject to any liability arising from their design if the construction subcontract for that design is not performed by that subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22172.4.

(a) If the local agency elects to award a project pursuant to this chapter, retention proceeds withheld by the local agency from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation. Work performed to establish the guaranteed maximum price shall not be subject to retention.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build
 entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any subcontractor that is not a member of the design-build entity, before or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required, and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22172.5.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, no later than January 1, 2028, a local agency that uses the progressive design-build process pursuant to this chapter shall submit to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature a report on the use of the progressive design-build process.

(b) The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

(1) A description of the project or projects awarded using the progressive design-build process.

(2) The contract award amounts.

(3) The design-build entities awarded the project or projects.

(4) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, or award of the contracts, including the resolution of the protests.

(5) A description of the prequalification process.

(6) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that provided design services, but did not meet the target price for their scope of work, and therefore did not perform construction services on that project.

(7) Whether or not any portion of a design prepared by the specialty subcontractor
 that did not perform the construction work for that design was used by the local agency.

(8) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a small business, as specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(9) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a microbusiness, as specified in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(10) If a project awarded under this chapter has been completed, an assessment of the project performance, including, but not limited to, a summary of any delays or cost increases.

(c) The report submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22173.

Nothing in this chapter affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22174.)
-------------------------------------------

22174.

This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2029, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2022, Ch. 243, Sec. 1.   (SB 991)   Effective January 1, 2023.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Chapter 4.1, commencing with Section 22170.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4.5. Civic Openness in Negotiations  [22175. - 22178.]

22175.

This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Civic Reporting Openness in Negotiations Efficiency Act, or CRONEY.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 714, Sec. 1.   (SB 331)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22176.

As used in this chapter, “civic openness in negotiations ordinance” or “COIN ordinance” means an ordinance adopted by a city, county, city and county, or special district that requires any of the following as a part of any collective bargaining process undertaken pursuant to the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 3500) of Division 4 of Title 1 of the Government Code):

(a) The preparation of an independent economic analysis describing the fiscal costs of benefit and pay components currently provided to members of a recognized employee organization, as defined in Section 3501 of the Government Code.

(b) The completion of the independent economic analysis prior to the presentation of an opening proposal by the public employer.

(c) Availability for review by the public of the independent economic analysis before presentation of an opening proposal by the public employer.

(d) Updating of the independent economic analysis to reflect the annual or cumulative costs of each proposal made by the public employer or recognized employee organization.

(e) Updating of the independent economic analysis to reflect any absolute amount or change from the current actuarially computed unfunded liability associated with the pension or postretirement health benefits.

(f) The report from a closed session of a meeting of the public employer’s governing body of offers, counteroffers, or supposals made by the public employer or the recognized employee organization and communicated during that closed session.

(g) The report from a closed session of a meeting of the public employer’s governing body of any list of names of persons in attendance during any negotiations session, the date of the session, the length of the session, the location of the session, or pertinent facts regarding the negotiations that occurred during a session.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 714, Sec. 1.   (SB 331)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22177.

(a) This chapter applies only to a city, county, city and county, or special district that has adopted a COIN ordinance, which is effective and operative. This chapter shall not apply if the city, county, city and county, or special district suspends, repeals, or revokes its COIN ordinance. 

(b) This chapter shall not apply to a contract if the contract is required to respond to, recover from, or mitigate the effects of any of the following:

(1) A temporary public safety emergency declared by the chief law enforcement officer of a city, county, city and county, or special district.

(2) A state of war emergency, state of emergency, or local emergency, as those terms are defined in Section 8558 of the Government Code.

(c) This chapter shall not apply to a renewal of a contract if the employees performing the services are covered by a collective bargaining agreement that is governed by the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. Sec. 151 et seq.).

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 714, Sec. 1.   (SB 331)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------

22178.

(a) This chapter shall apply to any contracts with a value of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), and to any contracts with a person or entity, or related person or entity, with a cumulative value of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) within the fiscal year of the city, county, city and county, or special district, being negotiated between the city, county, city and county, or special district, and any person or entity that seeks to provide services or goods to the city, county, city and county, or special district, in the following areas: accounting, financing, hardware and software maintenance, health care, human resources, human services, information technology, telecommunications,
 janitorial maintenance, legal services, lobbying, marketing, office equipment maintenance, passenger vehicle maintenance, property leasing, public relations, public safety, social services, transportation, or waste removal.

(b) The city, county, city and county, or special district shall designate an unbiased independent auditor to review the cost of any proposed contract. The independent auditor shall prepare a report on the cost of the contract and provide the report to all parties and make it available to the public before the governing body takes any action to approve or disapprove the contract. The report shall comply with the following:

(1) The report shall include a recommendation regarding the viability of the contract, including any supplemental data upon which the
 report is based, and shall determine the fiscal impacts attributable to each term and condition of the contract.

(2) The report shall be made available to the public at least 30 days before the issue can be heard before the governing body and at least 60 days before any action to approve or disapprove the contract by the governing body.

(3) Any proposed changes to the contract after it has been approved by the governing body shall adhere to the same approval requirements as the original contract. The changes shall not go into effect until all of the requirements of this subdivision are met.

(c) The city, county, city and county, or special district shall disclose all offers and counteroffers to the public within 24 hours on
 its Internet Web site.

(d) Before approving any contract, the city, county, city and county, or special district shall release a list of names of all persons in attendance, whether in person or by electronic means, during any negotiation session regarding the contract, the date of the session, the length of the session, the location where the session took place, and any pertinent facts regarding the negotiations that occurred in that session.

(e) Representatives of the governing body shall advise the governing body of all offers, counteroffers, information, or statements of position discussed by the contracting person or entity and city, county, city and county, or special district representatives participating in negotiations regarding any contract.

(f) Each governing body member and staff members of governing body offices shall disclose publicly all verbal, written, electronic, or other communications regarding a subject matter related to the negotiations or pending negotiations they have had with any official or unofficial representative of the private entity within 24 hours after the communication occurs.

(g) A final governing body determination regarding approval of any contract shall be undertaken only after the matter has been heard at a minimum of two meetings of the governing body wherein the public has had the opportunity to review and comment on the matter.

(History: Added by Stats. 2015, Ch. 714, Sec. 1.   (SB 331)   Effective January 1, 2016.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4.6. Transit Progressive Design-Build Contracting [22180. - 22180.11.]

22180.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) (1) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that may include, but are not limited to, price, features, function, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance.

(2) A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the local agency and the objectives of the project.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or about the construction
 of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services, as needed, pursuant to a design-build contract.

(d) “Design-build project” means a project using the progressive design-build construction procurement process described in this chapter.

(e) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities
 identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(f) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the local agency and the design-build entity for the design-build entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(g) “Local agency” means any of the following:

(1) A transit district, included transit district, municipal operator, included municipal operator, or a consolidated agency, as described in Section 132353.1 of the Public Utilities Code.

(2) A joint powers authority formed to
 provide transit service, or a county transportation commission created pursuant to Section 130050, 130050.1, or 130050.2 of the Public Utilities Code.

(3) A regional transportation agency, as defined in subdivision (i) of Section 6820.

(4) A local or regional agency responsible for the construction of transit projects.

(h) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project.

(i) “Qualifications-based selection” means the process by which the local agency solicits for services from the design-build entities and that price is not the sole factor as the basis
 of award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.1.

A local agency may procure progressive design-build contracts and use the progressive design-build contracting process described in this chapter for up to 10 public works projects in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000) for each project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.2.

A local agency entering into design-build contracts authorized under this chapter shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the local agency relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.3.

The procurement process for progressive design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) The local agency shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to select a design-build entity to execute the project. The request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, the following elements:

(1) Documentation of the size, type, and desired design character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the local agency’s needs, including the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate the design-build entity’s qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and
 any other information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other nonprice-related factors. The local agency may require that a preliminary cost estimate be included in the design-build entities’ responses and consider those costs in evaluating the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the local agency. In preparing the standard template, the local agency may consult with the construction industry, the
 building trades and surety industry, and other local agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this chapter. The template shall require the following information:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the entity’s shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of the statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build
 entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the
 organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(5) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(b) (1) A design-build entity shall not be evaluated for selection unless the entity provides an enforceable commitment
 to the local agency that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if one or more of the following requirements are met:

(A) The local agency has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the local agency
 before January 1, 2023.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as provided in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(c) At the close of the solicitation period, the local agency shall review the submissions. The local agency may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. The local agency may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the project.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the local agency shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the local agency’s contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.4.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the local agency, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The local agency shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.5.

(a) After selecting a design-build entity based upon qualifications, the local agency may enter into a contract and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a guaranteed maximum price for the project.

(b) (1) Upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the project, the local agency, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract with the design-build entity to contract for the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project, consistent with the guaranteed maximum price. In the event that there are unforeseen site conditions, the local
 agency may amend its contract with the design-build entity accordingly and consistent with the guaranteed maximum price, to enable the entity to complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(2) If the cost for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project exceeds the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the cost for these activities are less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the cost and the guaranteed maximum price unless there is a prior written agreement concerning the sharing of these funds. For purposes
 of this section, cost shall include the design-build entity’s direct costs, general conditions, overhead, and fee.

(c) (1) If the local agency and the design-build entity do not reach agreement on a guaranteed maximum price, or the local agency otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract to complete the remaining work, the local agency may solicit proposals to complete the project from firms that submitted statements of qualifications pursuant to Section 22180.3. The local agency may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the city, county, city and county, or special district, as applicable, to do so, formally solicit proposals from other design-build entities, and the contract award shall be made on a best value basis.

(2) The
 design professionals responsible for performing design services on behalf of a design-build entity that has been replaced pursuant to paragraph (1) shall have sole liability for their design errors and omissions, provided the local agency elects to use their complete and stamped designs with subsequent design-build entities or licensed contractors.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 80, Sec. 109.   (SB 1525)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.6.

(a) The local agency, in each design-build request for qualifications, may identify specific types of subcontractors that shall be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications, the design-build entity shall proceed as listed in this subdivision in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work for projects with a contract
 value greater than or equal to ten million dollars ($10,000,000).

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the local agency, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract on a best value basis. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(c) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(d) A
 construction subcontractor licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code that provides design services used on a project authorized by this chapter shall not be subject to any liability arising from their design if the construction subcontract for that design is not performed by that subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.7.

(a) If the local agency elects to award a project pursuant to this chapter, retention proceeds withheld by the local agency from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation. Work performed to establish the guaranteed maximum price shall not be subject to retention.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any
 subcontractor that is not a member of the design-build entity, before or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required, and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.8.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, no later than January 1, 2028, a local agency that uses the progressive design-build process pursuant to this chapter shall submit to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature a report on the use of the progressive design-build process.

(b) The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

(1) A description of the project or projects awarded using the progressive design-build process.

(2) The contract award amounts.

(3) The design-build
 entities awarded the project or projects.

(4) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, or award of the contracts, including the resolution of the protests.

(5) A description of the prequalification process.

(6) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that provided design services, but did not meet the target price for their scope of work, and therefore did not perform construction services on that project.

(7) Whether or not any portion of a design prepared by the specialty subcontractor that did not perform the construction work for that design was used by the local agency.

(8) The number of
 specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a small business, as specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(9) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a microbusiness, as specified in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(10) If a project awarded under this chapter has been completed, an assessment of the project performance, including, but not limited to, a summary of any delays or cost increases.

(c) The report submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.9.

The authorization to use the progressive design-build contracting process pursuant to this chapter does not include the authority to perform construction inspection services for projects on, or interfacing with, the state highway system. Construction inspection services for those projects shall be performed by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 14000) of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code, consistent with Section 91.2 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.10.

Nothing in this chapter affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, pursuant to Section 22180.11)
-------------------------------------------

22180.11.

This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2029, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 310, Sec. 1.   (SB 617)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2029, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Ch. 4.6, commencing with Section 22180.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4.7. Local Agency Design-Build Contracting [22185. - 22185.11.]

22185.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) (1) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that may include, but are not limited to, price, features, function, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance.

(2) A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the local agency and the objectives of the project.

(b) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by the design-build entity to a subcontractor that will perform work or labor or render service to the design-build entity in or
 about the construction of the work or improvement, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the design-build entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according to detailed drawings contained in the plans and specifications produced by the design-build team.

(c) “Design-build entity” means a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, and engineering services as needed pursuant to a design-build contract.

(d) “Design-build project” means any project using the progressive design-build construction procurement process described in this chapter, but does not include projects on state-owned or state-operated facilities.

(e) “Design-build team” means the design-build entity itself and the individuals and other entities identified by the design-build entity as members of its team. Members shall include the general contractor and, if utilized in the design of the project, all electrical, mechanical, and plumbing contractors.

(f) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment amount agreed upon by the local agency and the design-build entity for the design-build entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(g) “Local agency” means a city, county, city and county, or special district.

(h) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured from a single
 entity that is selected through a qualifications-based selection at the earliest feasible stage of the project.

(i) “Qualifications-based selection” means the process by which the local agency solicits for services from the design-build entities and that price is not the sole factor as the basis of award.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.1.

A local agency may procure progressive design-build contracts and use the progressive design-build contracting process described in this chapter for up to 10 public works projects in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000) for each project.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.2.

A local agency entering into design-build contracts authorized under this chapter shall develop guidelines for a standard organizational conflict-of-interest policy, consistent with applicable law, regarding the ability of a person or entity that performs services for the local agency relating to the solicitation of a design-build project, to submit a proposal as a design-build entity, or to join a design-build team.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.3.

The procurement process for progressive design-build projects shall progress as follows:

(a) The local agency shall prepare and issue a request for qualifications in order to select a design-build entity to execute the project. The request for qualifications shall include, but is not limited to, the following elements:

(1) Documentation of the size, type, and desired design character of the project and any other information deemed necessary to describe adequately the local agency’s needs, including the expected cost range, the methodology that will be used by the local agency to evaluate the design-build entity’s qualifications, the procedure for final selection of the design-build entity, and
 any other information deemed necessary by the local agency to inform interested parties of the contracting opportunity.

(2) Significant factors that the local agency reasonably expects to consider in evaluating qualifications, including technical design and construction expertise, and all other non-price-related factors. The local agency may require that a preliminary cost estimate be included in the design-build entities’ responses and consider those costs in evaluating the statements of qualifications.

(3) The relative importance or the weight assigned to each of the factors identified in the request for qualifications.

(4) A standard template request for statements of qualifications prepared by the local agency. In preparing the standard template, the local agency may consult with the construction industry, the
 building trades and surety industry, and other local agencies interested in using the authorization provided by this chapter. The template shall require the following information:

(A) If the design-build entity is a privately held corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or joint venture, a listing of all of the entity’s shareholders, partners, or members known at the time of the statement of qualification submission who will perform work on the project.

(B) Evidence that the members of the design-build team have completed, or have demonstrated the experience, competency, capability, and capacity to complete, projects of similar size, scope, or complexity, and that proposed key personnel have sufficient experience and training to competently manage and complete the design and construction of the project, and a financial statement that ensures that the design-build
 entity has the capacity to complete the project.

(C) The licenses, registration, and credentials required to design and construct the project, including, but not limited to, information on the revocation or suspension of any license, credential, or registration.

(D) Evidence that establishes that the design-build entity has the capacity to obtain all required payment and performance bonding, liability insurance, and errors and omissions insurance.

(E) Information concerning workers’ compensation experience history and a worker safety program.

(F) If the proposed design-build entity is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or other legal entity, a copy of the organizational documents or agreement committing to form the
 organization.

(G) An acceptable safety record. A proposer’s safety record shall be deemed acceptable if its experience modification rate for the most recent three-year period is an average of 1.00 or less, and its average total recordable injury or illness rate and average lost work rate for the most recent three-year period does not exceed the applicable statistical standards for its business category or if the proposer is a party to an alternative dispute resolution system as provided for in Section 3201.5 of the Labor Code.

(5) The information required under this subdivision shall be certified under penalty of perjury by the design-build entity and its general partners or joint venture members.

(b) (1) A design-build entity shall not be evaluated for selection unless the entity provides an
 enforceable commitment to the local agency that the entity and its subcontractors at every tier will use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all work on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(2) This subdivision shall not apply if one or more of the following requirements are met:

(A) The local agency has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement.

(B) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into
 by the local agency before January 1, 2023.

(C) The entity has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind the entity and all its subcontractors at every tier performing the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) For purposes of this subdivision, “project labor agreement” has the same meaning as provided in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(c) At the close of the solicitation period, the local agency shall review the submissions. The local agency may evaluate submissions based solely upon the information provided in each design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. The local agency may also interview some or all of the design-build entities to further evaluate their qualifications for the project.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon issuance of a contract award, the local agency shall publicly announce its award, identifying the design-build entity to which the award is made, along with a statement regarding the basis of the award. The statement regarding the local agency’s contract award and the contract file shall provide sufficient information to satisfy an external audit.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.4.

(a) The design-build entity shall provide payment and performance bonds for the project in the form and in the amount required by the local agency, and issued by a California admitted surety. The amount of the payment bond shall not be less than the amount of the performance bond.

(b) The design-build contract shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(c) The local agency shall develop a standard form of payment and performance bond for its design-build projects.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.5.

(a) After selecting a design-build entity based upon qualifications, the local agency may enter into a contract and direct the design-build entity to begin design and preconstruction activities sufficient to establish a guaranteed maximum price for the project.

(b) (1) Upon agreement of the guaranteed maximum price for the project, the local agency, at its sole and absolute discretion, may amend its contract with the design-build entity to contract for the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project, consistent with the guaranteed maximum price. In the event that there are unforeseen site
 conditions, the local agency may amend its contract with the design-build entity accordingly and consistent with the guaranteed maximum price, to enable the entity to complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project.

(2) If the cost for completing all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project exceeds the guaranteed maximum price, the costs exceeding the guaranteed maximum price shall be the responsibility of the design-build entity. If the cost for these activities are less than the guaranteed maximum price, the design-build entity shall not be entitled to the difference between the cost and the guaranteed maximum price unless there is a prior written agreement concerning the sharing
 of these funds. For purposes of this section, cost shall include the design-build entity’s direct costs, general conditions, overhead, and fee.

(c) (1) If the local agency and the design-build entity do not reach agreement on a guaranteed maximum price, or the local agency otherwise elects not to amend the design-build entity’s contract to complete the remaining work, the local agency may solicit proposals to complete the project from firms that submitted statements of qualifications pursuant to Section 22185.3. The local
 agency may also, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the city, county, city and county, or special district, as applicable, to do so, formally solicit proposals from other design-build entities, and contract award shall be made on a best value basis.

(2) The design professionals responsible for performing design services on behalf of a design-build entity that has been replaced pursuant to paragraph (1) shall have sole liability for their design errors and omissions, provided the local agency elects to use their complete and stamped designs with subsequent design-build entities or licensed contractors.

(History: Amended by Stats. 2024, Ch. 80, Sec. 110.   (SB 1525)   Effective January 1, 2025.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.6.

(a) The local agency, in each design-build request for qualifications, may identify specific types of subcontractors that shall be included in the design-build entity’s statement of qualifications. All construction subcontractors that are identified in the statement of qualifications shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(b) Following award of the design-build contract, except for those construction subcontractors listed in the statement of qualifications, the design-build entity shall proceed as listed in this subdivision in awarding construction subcontracts with a value exceeding one-half of 1 percent of the contract price allocable to construction work for projects with a contract
 value of greater than or equal to ten million dollars ($10,000,000).

(1) Provide public notice of availability of work to be subcontracted in accordance with the publication requirements applicable to the competitive bidding process of the local agency, including a fixed date and time on which qualifications statements, bids, or proposals will be due.

(2) Establish reasonable qualification criteria and standards.

(3) Award the subcontract on a best value basis. The process may include prequalification or short-listing.

(c) Subcontractors awarded construction subcontracts under this subdivision shall be afforded all the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(d) A construction subcontractor licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code that provides design services used on a project authorized by this chapter shall not be subject to any liability arising from their design if the construction subcontract for that design is not performed by that subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.7.

(a) If the local agency elects to award a project pursuant to this chapter, retention proceeds withheld by the local agency from the design-build entity shall not exceed 5 percent if a performance and payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer, is required in the solicitation. Work performed to establish the guaranteed maximum price shall not be subject to retention.

(b) In a contract between the design-build entity and a subcontractor, and in a contract between a subcontractor and any subcontractor thereunder, the percentage of the retention proceeds withheld shall not exceed the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity. If the design-build entity provides written notice to any
 subcontractor that is not a member of the design-build entity, before or at the time the bid is requested, that a bond may be required, and the subcontractor subsequently is unable or refuses to furnish a bond to the design-build entity, then the design-build entity may withhold retention proceeds in excess of the percentage specified in the contract between the local agency and the design-build entity from any payment made by the design-build entity to the subcontractor.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.8.

(a) Notwithstanding Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, no later than December 31, 2028, a local agency that uses the progressive design-build process pursuant to this chapter shall submit, to the appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the Legislature, a report on the use of the progressive design-build process.

(b) The report shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

(1) A description of the project or projects awarded using the progressive design-build process.

(2) The contract award amounts.

(3) The design-build
 entities awarded the project or projects.

(4) A description of any written protests concerning any aspect of the solicitation, bid, or award of the contracts, including the resolution of the protests.

(5) A description of the prequalification process.

(6) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that provided design services, but did not meet the target price for their scope of work, and therefore did not perform construction services on that project.

(7) Whether or not any portion of a design prepared by the specialty subcontractor that did not perform the construction work for that design was used by the local agency.

(8) The number of
 specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a small business, as specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(9) The number of specialty subcontractors listed by construction trade type, on each project, that meet the definition of a microbusiness, as specified in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 14837 of the Government Code.

(10) If a project awarded under this chapter has been completed, an assessment of the project performance, including, but not limited to, a summary of any delays or cost increases.

(c) The report submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.9.

Nothing in this chapter authorizes a local agency to perform work on a state-owned or state-operated facility.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.10.

Nothing in this chapter affects, expands, alters, or limits any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, pursuant to Section 22185.11.)
-------------------------------------------

22185.11.

This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2030, and as of that date is repealed.

(History: Added by Stats. 2023, Ch. 500, Sec. 1.   (SB 706)   Effective January 1, 2024.   Repealed as of January 1, 2030, by its own provisions.   Note: Repeal affects Ch. 4.7, commencing with Section 22185.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4.8. Port of Long Beach Pier Wind Project Contracting [22190. - 22199.]

22190.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Apprenticeable occupation” has the same meaning as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 2601.

(b) “Best interests of the city” means a procurement process that is determined by the city to provide the best value and an expedited delivery schedule while maintaining a high level of quality workmanship and materials.

(c) “Best value” means a procurement process whereby the selected bidder may be selected on the basis of objective criteria for evaluating the qualifications of bidders with the
 resulting selection representing the best combination of price and qualifications.

(d) “Business entity” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting, architectural, engineering, financial, construction, operations, management, facilities maintenance, and other services for development of the project, as applicable in relation to its respective scope of work.

(e) “City” means the City of Long Beach and its Board of Harbor Commissioners.

(f) “Construction” for purposes of the project, as defined in subdivision (p), does not include maritime and longshore operations.

(g) “Construction manager at-risk” means a competitively procured contract by the city with an individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other recognized legal entity, that is appropriately licensed in this state, including a contractor’s license issued by the Contractors State License Board, and that guarantees the cost of a project and furnishes construction management services, including, but not limited to, preparation and coordination of bid packages, scheduling, cost control, value engineering, evaluation,
 preconstruction services, and construction administration. 

(h) “Construction Manager/General Contractor” means a project delivery method using a best value procurement process in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and construction or construction management services during the construction phase of the project.

(i) “Construction subcontract” means each subcontract awarded by a business entity to a subcontractor that will perform work, labor, or render services to the business entity in or about the construction of the project, or a subcontractor licensed by the State of California that, under subcontract to the business entity, specially fabricates and installs a portion of the work or improvement according
 to detailed drawings contained in plans and specifications.

(j) “Design-build” means a procurement process in which both the design and construction of a project are procured in a single phase. 

(k) “Design sequencing” means a method of project delivery that enables the sequencing of design activities to permit each construction phase to commence when the design for that phase is complete, instead of requiring the design for the entire project to be completed before commencing construction.

(l) “Guaranteed maximum price” means the maximum payment agreed upon by the city and a business entity to finish all remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out
 the project or any part of the project.

(m) “Maritime and longshore operations” for purposes of the project, as defined in subdivision (p), includes all of the following:

(1) The loading and unloading of cargo or materials to and from vessels, or the movement of cargo or materials to and from vessels, or other directly related functions, at any terminal or port facility to the cargo’s or material’s point of rest, except for the movement of construction materials on a barge, construction staging area, or construction area when used as a construction work platform, rigging and hoisting of construction materials directly from a barge, construction staging area, or construction area when being
 used as a construction work platform into the construction process, the removal of construction materials directly from the project to a barge, construction staging area, or construction area when being used as a construction work platform, and the movement of construction materials and construction equipment within the construction staging area, from the construction staging area to the construction site, and on the construction site.

(2) Maintenance and repair work on the containers and equipment used to load or unload vessels.

(3) Maintenance and repair work necessary to facilitate the movement of cargo or materials to and from vessels at any terminal or port facility to the cargo or material’s point of rest.

(n) “Preconstruction services” means services during the design phase, including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the city to design a more constructible project. 

(o) “Progressive design-build” means a project delivery method in which the design, preconstruction services, and construction of the project or part of the project are procured, in one or more stages, from a single design-build entity that is selected
 through a best value-based selection at an early stage of the project. 

(p) (1) “Project” means the terminal development project at the Port of Long Beach, currently known as Pier Wind, that is anticipated to involve the construction and development of a large-scale, multiacre terminal and transportation corridor to support offshore wind-related activities. 

(2) “Project” does not include the construction, assembly,
 operation, or maintenance of offshore wind turbine systems or their floating foundations, nor the manufacturing and fabrication of their components. 

(3) “Project” does not include maritime and longshore operations.

(q) “Project labor agreement” has the same meaning as provided in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 2500.

(r) “Public works” has the same meaning as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 1720 of the Labor Code.

(s) “Vessel” includes, but is not limited to, a ship, boat, barge, and other related maritime craft.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22191.

(a) (1) The city may procure contracts for the project or any part of the project pursuant to this chapter.

(2) The city may enter into an alternative project delivery method contract for any part of the project pursuant to this chapter upon completing both of the following:

(A) An evaluation of the traditional
 design-bid-build process of construction and of the alternative project delivery method in a public meeting.

(B) Following the evaluation specified in subparagraph (A), a written finding that use of the alternative project delivery method on the project will accomplish one or more of the following objectives:

(i) Reduce project costs.

(ii) Expedite the completion of the project.

(iii) Provide features that are not achievable through the design-bid-build method.

(b) Subject to the limitations of this chapter, the city may utilize any of the following alternative project delivery methods, or any combination
 of the following methods:

(1) Construction manager at-risk.

(2) Construction Manager/General Contractor.

(3) Design-build.

(4) Design sequencing.

(5) Progressive design-build.

(c) The design and construction of the project may occur in sequential or concurrent phases.

(d) This chapter does not allow an alternative project delivery method to include maritime and longshore operations.

(e) Except to the extent otherwise required under applicable law, the city may include in any contract procured pursuant to this chapter any provision that the city determines is necessary or appropriate.

(f) (1) The city shall prepare, publicly advertise, and issue solicitation documents to procure and award any contract pursuant to this chapter, subject to the following:

(A) For Construction Manager/General Contractor contracts, the solicitation documents prepared by the city shall include criteria that are the same as, or substantially similar to, those provided in subparagraphs (A) to (K), inclusive, of paragraph (1) of, and paragraph (2) of, subdivision (a) of Section 6703.

(B) For design-build and progressive design-build contracts, the city shall comply with the same or substantially similar requirements of Section 22185.2 and Sections 22185.4 to 22185.7, inclusive, and subdivisions (a), (c), and (d) of Section 22185.3.

(2) The contract solicitation process may include prequalification or short-listing business entities who seek to perform the project or any part of the project.

(3) The city shall review submissions it solicits and receives and may award contracts for the project to one or more responsible business entities whose submissions are determined by the city to be the most advantageous by providing the best value in meeting the best interests of the city.

(g) The city shall retain the right not to award any contract
 for the project, including if the city determines that the project is not in the best interests of the city or should negotiations with any business entity otherwise fail.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22192.

(a) (1) Upon agreement of the pricing, including any guaranteed maximum price if applicable, for any relevant aspects of the project, the city, in its sole and absolute discretion, may do all of the following:

(A) Amend its contract with the business entity.

(B) Direct the business entity to complete the remaining design, preconstruction, and construction activities sufficient to complete and close out the project or any part of the project.

(C) Add funds to the contract for the activities pursuant to this
 subdivision.

(2) Any amendment of the existing contract with the business entity shall not require any additional competitive process. 

(3) This section does not require the city to amend an existing contract or enter into a new contract for remaining design, preconstruction, or construction activities for the project.

(b) (1) If the city and the business entity do not reach an agreement on pricing for any relevant aspect of the project, or if the city otherwise elects not to have the business entity
 complete some or all of the remaining work, the city may solicit proposals to complete some or all of the remaining work for the project from firms that previously submitted proposals.

(2) (A) The city may, upon written determination that it is in the best interest of the city to do so, formally solicit proposals from other business entities to complete some or all of the remaining work for the project, or complete the project using other delivery methods.

(B) If otherwise applicable to the city, any contract awarded
 for the project shall be made on a best value basis.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22193.

(a) The city, in its solicitation for proposals or bids for the project, may identify specific types of subcontractors, certifications, and license classifications that shall be included in the business entity’s proposal or bid.

(b) All construction subcontractors that are identified in the business entity’s proposal or bid shall be afforded the protections of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 4100) of Part 1.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22194.

(a) All public works constructed pursuant to this chapter shall comply with Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.

(b) A business entity shall not be evaluated for selection or eligible for selection by the city unless the business entity provides an enforceable commitment to the city that the business entity and its subcontractors at every tier shall use a skilled and trained workforce to perform all construction work
 on the project or contract that falls within an apprenticeable occupation in the building and construction trades, in accordance with Chapter 2.9 (commencing with Section 2600) of Part 1.

(c) Subdivision (b) shall not apply if one or more of the following requirements are met:

(1) The city has entered into a project labor agreement that will bind all contractors and subcontractors performing construction work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce, and the business entity agrees to be bound by that project labor agreement. 

(2) The project or contract is being performed under the extension or renewal of a project labor agreement that was entered into by the city before January 1, 2025, which binds all contractors and subcontractors performing construction work to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(3) The business entity has entered into a project labor agreement that shall bind the entity and all of its subcontractors at every tier performing construction work on the project or contract to use a skilled and trained workforce.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22195.

The business entity shall provide payment bonds for the project issued by a California-admitted surety in the form, at the times, and in the amount required by the city.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22196.

(a) The relevant contracts between the city and the business entity for the project shall require errors and omissions insurance coverage for the design elements of the project.

(b) The relevant contracts between the city and the business entity shall be subject to subdivision (b) of Section 2782 of the Civil Code.

(c) Any contract between the business entity and a contractor or subcontractor relating to the project shall
 be subject to Section 2782.05 of the Civil Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22197.

(a) The negotiation process shall expressly prohibit practices that may result in unlawful activity, including, but not limited to, rebates, kickbacks, or other unlawful consideration.

(b) The negotiation process shall expressly prohibit city employees from participating in the selection process when those employees have a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract under this chapter that would subject those employees to Section 87100 of the Government Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22198.

All documents related to the project shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (Division 10 (commencing with Section 7920.000) of Title 1 of the Government Code), except those exempted from disclosure under the act.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------

22199.

(a) The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter or its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.

(b) Except as expressly provided herein, this chapter does not affect, expand, alter, or limit any rights or remedies otherwise available at law.

(History: Added by Stats. 2024, Ch. 707, Sec. 1.   (AB 2235)   Effective January 1, 2025.)
-------------------------------------------



  CHAPTER 4.9. Construction Manager/General Contractor Project Delivery Program [22199.5. - 22199.6.]

22199.5.

As used in this chapter:

(a) “Best value” means a value determined by evaluation of objective criteria that relate to price, features, functions, life-cycle costs, experience, and past performance. A best value determination may involve the selection of the lowest cost proposal meeting the interests of the local agency and meeting the objectives of the project.

(b) “Construction manager” means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity that is a licensed contractor pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and that is able to provide appropriately licensed contracting and engineering services as needed pursuant to a Construction
 Manager/General Contractor method contract.

(c) “Construction Manager/General Contractor method” means a project delivery method in which a construction manager is procured to provide preconstruction services during the design phase of the project and construction services during the construction phase of the project. The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the contract for preconstruction services or at a later time. The execution of the design and the construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(d) “Local agency” means a city, county, city and county, or special district authorized by law to provide for the production, storage, supply, treatment, or distribution of any water from any source.

(e) “Preconstruction services” means advice during
 the design phase, including, but not limited to, scheduling, pricing, and phasing to assist the local agency to design a more constructible project.

(f) “Project” means a public work necessary for the construction of a recycled water facility or infrastructure designed specifically to alleviate water shortages attributable to drought, climate change, or other environmental factors.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 655, Sec. 1.   (SB 598)   Effective January 1, 2026.   Inoperative January 1, 2031, pursuant to Section 22199.6.)
-------------------------------------------

22199.6.

(a) Upon approval by its governing body, a local agency may use, in addition to other methods of project delivery otherwise allowable by law, the Construction Manager/General Contractor method of project delivery for a regional recycled water project or other water infrastructure project undertaken to alleviate water supply
 shortages attributable to drought or climate change. The local agency shall follow the procedures described in Sections 21568.5 to 21568.10, inclusive.

(b) The authorization under this section shall apply to no more than 15 capital outlay projects for each local agency.

(c) A local agency shall award a contract pursuant to this section on a best value basis or to the lowest responsible bidder.

(d) (1) The provisions of this chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2031, and as of that date are inoperative.

(2) A contract awarded pursuant to this chapter before it becomes inoperative, but after Sections 21568.5 to 21568.10, inclusive, become inoperative pursuant to Section 21568.11, shall continue in full force and effect until completion, including any subsequently executed changes to the contract, or termination.

(History: Added by Stats. 2025, Ch. 655, Sec. 1.   (SB 598)   Effective January 1, 2026.)
-------------------------------------------



PART 4. ARBITRATION OF PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACT CLAIMS [22200. - 22201.]

22200.

As used in this part:

(a) “Public works contract” means, except for a contract awarded pursuant to the State Contract Act (Part 2 (commencing with Section 10100)), a contract awarded through competitive bids or otherwise by the state, any of its political subdivisions or public agencies for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any kind upon real property.

(b) “Claim” means a demand for monetary compensation or damages, arising under or relating to the performance of any public works contract.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1408, Sec. 10.)
-------------------------------------------

22201.

Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the terms of any public works contract may include at the time of bidding and of award a provision for arbitration of any claim pursuant to Article 7.1 (commencing with Section 10240) of Chapter 1 of Part 2.

(History: Added by Stats. 1988, Ch. 1408, Sec. 10.)
-------------------------------------------



PART 5. WITHHELD CONTRACT FUNDS [22300. - 22300.]

22300.

(a) For purposes of this section, “contractor” includes, but is not limited to, a contractor performing a public works contract, as defined in Section 1101, and any person or entity that would qualify as a contractor under Section 6106.5.

(b) Provisions shall be included in any invitation for bid and in any contract documents to permit the substitution of securities for any moneys withheld by a public agency to ensure performance under a contract; however, substitution of securities provisions shall not be required in contracts in which there will be financing provided by the Farmers Home Administration of the United States Department of Agriculture pursuant to the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 U.S.C. Sec.
 1921 et seq.), and where federal regulations or policies, or both, do not allow the substitution of securities. At the request and expense of the contractor, securities equivalent to the amount withheld shall be deposited with the public agency, or with a state or federally chartered bank in this state as the escrow agent, who shall then pay those moneys to the contractor. Upon satisfactory completion of the contract, the securities shall be returned to the contractor.

(c) Alternatively, the contractor may request and the owner shall make payment of retentions earned directly to the escrow agent at the expense of the contractor. At the expense of the contractor, the contractor may direct the investment of the payments into securities and the contractor shall receive the interest earned on the investments upon the same terms provided for in this section for securities deposited by the contractor. Upon satisfactory completion of the contract, the
 contractor shall receive from the escrow agent all securities, interest, and payments received by the escrow agent from the owner, pursuant to the terms of this section.

(d) Securities eligible for investment under this section shall include those listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code, bank or savings and loan certificates of deposit, interest-bearing demand deposit accounts, standby letters of credit, or any other security mutually agreed to by the contractor and the public agency.

The contractor shall be the beneficial owner of any securities substituted for moneys withheld and shall receive any interest thereon.

Failure to include these provisions in bid and contract documents shall void any provisions for performance retentions in a public agency contract.

For purposes of this section, the term “public
 agency” shall include, but shall not be limited to, chartered cities.

(e) (1) Any contractor who elects to receive interest on moneys withheld in retention by a public agency shall, at the request of any subcontractor, make that option available to the subcontractor regarding any moneys withheld in retention by the contractor from the subcontractor. If the contractor elects to receive interest on any moneys withheld in retention by a public agency, then the subcontractor shall receive the identical rate of interest received by the contractor on any retention moneys withheld from the subcontractor by the contractor, less any actual pro rata costs associated with administering and calculating that interest. In the event that the interest rate is a fluctuating rate, the rate for the subcontractor shall be determined by calculating the interest rate paid during the time that retentions were withheld from the subcontractor. If
 the contractor elects to substitute securities in lieu of retention, then, by mutual consent of the contractor and subcontractor, the subcontractor may substitute securities in exchange for the release of moneys held in retention by the contractor.

(2) This subdivision shall apply only to those subcontractors performing more than five percent of the contractor’s total bid.

(3) No contractor shall require any subcontractor to waive any provision of this section.

(f) The Legislature hereby declares that the provisions of this section are of statewide concern and are necessary to encourage full participation by contractors and subcontractors in public contract procedures.

(g) The escrow agreement used hereunder shall be null, void, and unenforceable unless
 it is substantially similar to the following form:ESCROW AGREEMENT FOR
 SECURITY DEPOSITS IN LIEU OF RETENTION
This Escrow Agreement is made and entered into by and be­tween whose address is hereinafter called “Owner,”whose address is hereinafter called “Contractor” andwhose address is
 hereinafter called “Escrow Agent.”For the consideration hereinafter set forth, the Owner, Contractor, and Escrow Agent agree as follows:

(1) Pursuant to Section 22300 of the Public Contract Code of the State of California, Contractor has the option to deposit securities with Escrow Agent as a substitute for retention earnings required to be withheld by Owner pursuant to the Construction Contract entered into between the Owner and Contractor for ____ in the amount of ____ dated ____ (hereinafter referred to as the “Contract”). Alternatively, on written request of the Contractor, the Owner shall make payments of the retention earnings directly to the Escrow Agent. When the Contractor deposits the securities as a substitute for Contract earnings, the Escrow Agent shall
 notify the Owner within 10 days of the deposit. The market value of the securities at the time of the substitution shall be at least equal to the cash amount then required to be withheld as retention under the terms of the Contract between the Owner and Contractor. Securities shall be held in the name of ____, and shall designate the Contractor as the beneficial owner.

(2) The Owner shall make progress payments to the Contractor for those funds which otherwise would be withheld from progress payments pursuant to the Contract provisions, provided that the Escrow Agent holds securities in the form and amount specified above.

(3) When the Owner makes payment of retentions earned directly to the Escrow Agent, the Escrow Agent shall hold them for the benefit of the Contractor until the time that the escrow created under this contract is terminated. The Contractor may direct the
 investment of the payments into securities. All terms and conditions of this agreement and the rights and responsibilities of the parties shall be equally applicable and binding when the Owner pays the Escrow Agent directly.

(4) Contractor shall be responsible for paying all fees for the expenses incurred by Escrow Agent in administering the Escrow Account and all expenses of the Owner. These expenses and payment terms shall be determined by the Owner, Contractor, and Escrow Agent.

(5) The interest earned on the securities or the money market accounts held in escrow and all interest earned on that interest shall be for the sole account of Contractor and shall be subject to withdrawal by Contractor at any time and from time to time without notice to the Owner.

(6) Contractor shall have the right to withdraw all or any
 part of the principal in the Escrow Account only by written notice to Escrow Agent accompanied by written authorization from the Owner to the Escrow Agent that Owner consents to the withdrawal of the amount sought to be withdrawn by Contractor.

(7) The Owner shall have a right to draw upon the securities in the event of default by the Contractor. Upon seven days’ written notice to the Escrow Agent from the owner of the default, the Escrow Agent shall immediately convert the securities to cash and shall distribute the cash as instructed by the Owner.

(8) Upon receipt of written notification from the Owner certifying that the Contract is final and complete, and that the Contractor has complied with all requirements and procedures applicable to the Contract, Escrow Agent shall release to Contractor all securities and interest on deposit less escrow fees and charges of the Escrow
 Account. The escrow shall be closed immediately upon disbursement of all moneys and securities on deposit and payments of fees and charges.

(9) Escrow Agent shall rely on the written notifications from the Owner and the Contractor pursuant to Sections (5) to (8), inclusive, of this Agreement and the Owner and Contractor shall hold Escrow Agent harmless from Escrow Agent’s release and disbursement of the securities and interest as set forth above.

(10) The names of the persons who are authorized to give written notice or to receive written notice on behalf of the Owner and on behalf of Contractor in connection with the foregoing, and exemplars of their respective signatures are as follows: On behalf of Owner:On behalf of Contractor:
TitleTitleNameNameSignatureSignatureAddressAddress
On behalf of Escrow Agent:
TitleNameSignatureAddressAt the time the Escrow Account is opened, the Owner and Contractor shall deliver to the Escrow Agent a fully executed counterpart of this Agreement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement by their proper officers on the date first set forth above. OwnerContractor
TitleTitleNameNameSignatureSignature

(History: Amended by Stats. 2022, Ch. 427, Sec. 21.   (SB 1489)   Effective January 1, 2023.)
-------------------------------------------



PART 5.5. THE YEAR 2000 PROBLEM VENDOR COMPLIANCE AND INFORMATION PRACTICES POLICY [22350. - 22355.]

22350.

This part shall be known and may be cited as the Year 2000 Problem Vendor Compliance and Information Practices Policy.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 784, Sec. 21.   Effective October 10, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

22351.

For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply:

(a) “Contractor” means any individual, corporation, partnership, business entity, joint venture or association, or any other organization or any combination thereof, that has entered into a contractual relationship with any public entity.

(b) “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, business entity, joint venture, or association, or any other organization or any combination thereof.

(c) “Year 2000 Problem” has the same meaning as that set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 3269 of the Civil Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 784, Sec. 21.   Effective October 10, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

22352.

It is the policy of this state to do business solely with those persons and contractors that, subsequent to entering into any contract with a public entity, recognize the importance and urgency of the Year 2000 Problem, respond to inquiries from public entities regarding Year 2000 Problem compliance for all goods or services provided to the state, and participate in the disclosure of information to public entities regarding Year 2000 Problem compliance for all goods and services provided to the state.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 784, Sec. 21.   Effective October 10, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

22353.

(a) Any public entity may submit a written request for information regarding the Year 2000 Problem to any contractor who is under contract to provide, or was at any time under contract to provide, any project, materials, supplies, equipment, services, or real property, as described in Part 2 (commencing with Section 10100).

(b) Each request made pursuant to subdivision (a) shall include all of the following information:

(1) A direct citation of the authority to make a request pursuant to this part.

(2) Notification of the policy of the state regarding the Year 2000 Problem, as set forth in Section 22352.

(3) Notification of the responsible bidder provisions that exist under the State Contract Act (Part 2 (commencing with Section 10100)).

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 784, Sec. 21.   Effective October 10, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

22355.

Nothing in this part shall be construed to require any person or contractor to disclose any information that qualifies for protection as a trade secret, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 3426.1 of the Civil Code.

(History: Added by Stats. 1999, Ch. 784, Sec. 21.   Effective October 10, 1999.)
-------------------------------------------

